On Saturday (fn. 2) next after the feast of St. Edward the King in the 33rd year of the reign of King Edward [1305] Robert le Grouynour did his homage and fealty for all the tenements of Lostoke, and acknowledged that he held the manor of Lostoke entirely from the manor of Weverham for homage and service and fealty [fo. 38d (275 d)] and suit at the court of Weverham every fortnight, and 17s. yearly to the manor of Weverham at the four terms, and two customary pigs, and four foot-men in time of war at Chester bridge over the Dee, when Weverham finds eight foot-men, and three when the manor of Weverham finds six, or two when Weverham finds four men, with the ward and relief of Lostok for all service.

On Saturday next after the feast of St. Michael the Greater (Major') in the second year of the reign of King Edward son of King Edward [5 Oct. 1308], Hugh de Dutton did his homage and fealty, and acknowledged that he holds six oxgangs of land in the manor of Dutton by doing suit to the court of Weverham at special courts; and those who are settled in the said six oxgangs make an appearance once in the year for assize broken; and if they can acquit themselves, they shall be quit; if not, they shall do it. And he holds the lordship and waste by one sore sparrow hawk or 2s. at the feast of St. John the Baptist; and the said six oxgangs shall find four foot-men in time of war in Wales, when Weverham finds eight men, and of a less number he shall find a third part [sic], going as the vill of Weverham do.

On Saturday, the vigil of St. Peter in Cathedra [21 Feb.] in the year of our Lord 1337[–8], the eleventh [twelfth] year of the reign of King Edward the third after the Conquest, Thomas de Swetenham, son of Richard of that place the younger, did his fealty to Abbot Peter in his chamber at Vale Royal, for his manor of Swetenham, in the presence of Thomas de Erdeswyke, the steward, William de Swetenham and Richard de Vernon of Watecroft', and he will give for his relief 25s., and let him have a day . . . and he did homage in the abbot's chapel that same year on Saturday next after the feast of St. John before the Latin Gate [9 May] in the presence of Walter Welsh (Walens') witness and John de Cotys and Marchys. And afterwards in the court of Weverham he acknowledged . . .

