Feb. 1. Westminster.

To the sheriff of Hertford. Order to deliver in bail William Weremod, imprisoned at Berkamsted for the death of Elias Hors of Wardhurst, wherewith he is charged, as the king learns by inquisition taken by the sheriff that William slew Elias in self-defence.

Jan. 26. Westminster.

To the treasurer and barons of the exchequer, and to the justices appointed for the custody of the Jews. Whereas the king lately granted to William le Brun, his yeoman, and Isolda, William's wife, certain lands in Forthingbrigg, Randolveston, Perle, and Roghenor, and he now understands that the lands are charged in his Jewry by reason of certain sums of money that William de la Faleyse and Elias de la Faleyse, who formerly held the lands, received by way of loan from certain Jews of England in times past; the king, wishing to show favour to William and Isolda for their good and long service to him and his consort, has granted that they shall be quit of all debts that may be exacted from them by any Jews of the realm at any time and also that may be exacted for the king's use by reason of the said lands and of all other lands that they held on 12 January, in the 17th year of the reign, of the gift of the king and his consort, so charged in the Jewry up to the said day, whether the debts were in the king's hands or in the hands of any Jews, willing that the deeds and stars concerning the said debts that may be found in the chests of the chirographers or elsewhere shall be withdrawn and wholly annulled: the king therefore orders them to cause his letters patent of the gift to be read and enrolled before them, and to cause the deeds and stars aforesaid to be withdrawn and delivered cancelled to William and Isolda, and to cause them to be acquitted of the said debts.

Feb. 3. Westminster.

To the sheriff of Cambridge. Order to permit William de Burneton to have maintenance from his goods and chattels lately taken into the king's hands by the sheriff by the king's order, for himself and a moderate household staying with him in the Tower of London.

Feb. 3. Westminster.

To John de Insula, keeper of the forest of Chut. Order to cause Richard de Cumbe to have in that forest twenty oaks fit for timber to make a barn in the manor of Fitelton, which he holds at fee-ferm of the king's gift.

To the sheriff of Lincoln. Order to deliver on bail Walter Pixi and Thomas de Germethorp, imprisoned at Grimesby for the death of Richard de Rye, wherewith they are charged, as the king learns by inquisition taken by Simon le Conestable and William de Belesby that Walter and Thomas are not guilty of the death, but that Richard fell by mischance from a boat into the sea and was thus drowned.

Feb. 4. Westminster.

To Reginald de Grey, justice of Chester. Order to deliver to Peter de Arderne the manor of Gosewrd and all the issues received from it, to be held in name of wardship, saving the right of others and saving to Alice, late the wife of Thomas de Orreby, her dower, as the king learns by inquisition taken by the justice that Thomas, who held at his death a forestry in the king's forest of Mackesfeld of the king and his consort, held the said manor of Peter by the service of finding him a foot-soldier in the castle of Aldreford with a hauberk (lorica) and lance as often as the king's army should be summoned at Chester, by reason whereof the custody of the manor ought to pertain to Peter.

Feb. 5. Westminster.

To Thomas de Normanvill, escheator beyond Trent. Order to cause John de Karliolo, son and heir of William son of Ivo de Karliolo, to have seisin of the lands that his father held in chief, as the king has taken his homage.

To J. archbishop of Ireland, justiciary of Ireland. Order to cause William Burnell, constable of Dublin castle, to have in the forest of Glencry twelve oaks fit for timber, in order to repair his houses of Glenecapyn, of the king's gift.

Feb. 5. Westminster.

To the treasurer and barons of the exchequer. Order to acquit the master of the military order of the Temple in England of 20l. exacted from him for scutage for the knights' fees pertaining to the castle of Holgod for the king's armies of Wales in the fifth and tenth years of his reign, as it appears to the king that the master held the said castle with the knights' fees and all other appurtenances at fee-ferm of Edmund, earl of Cornwall in the said years, and that the earl did his service due to the king in the said armies.

Feb. 6. Westminster.

To the same. Order to acquit Ralph, bishop of Carlisle, of 40l. at which he was amerced before William de Vescy and his fellows, justices last in eyre for pleas of the Forest in co. Cumberland, for a trespass of the Forest, as the king had pardoned him.

To the sheriff of Salop. Order to deliver in bail Hugh Knyvet, imprisoned in Shrewsbury gaol for the death of Robert son of William de Acton, wherewith he is charged, as the king learns by the record of William Bagot and his fellows, justices to deliver that gaol, that Hugh slew Robert in self-defence.

Feb. 7. Westminster.

To the treasurer and barons of the exchequer. Order to search the late king's writs in the treasury concerning payments to be made to Stephen de Eddeworth, and to allow to him the arrears of such payments in the debts due from him to the exchequer, as the king compassionates his poverty.

To the sheriff of Stafford. Order to cause Adam le Loverd of Brocton to have seisin of a moiety of a messuage and of a quarter of a virgate of land in Brocton that Richard de la More of Brocton, who was hanged for felony, held, as the king learns by inquisition taken by the sheriff that they have been in the king's hands for a year and a day, and that Richard held them of Adam, and that the township of Brocton ought to answer for the king's year and waste thereof.

Feb. 8. Westminster.

To John son of Nigel, keeper of the forest of Bernewod. Order to cause William de Turvill, late sheriff of Buckingham and Bedford, to have in that forest twelve oaks fit for timber for the repair of the king's houses of the manor of Brehull.

Membrane 14.

Feb. 9. Westminster.

To the sheriff of Lancaster. Order to deliver in bail Adam le Tayllur, imprisoned at Lancaster for the death of Gilbert de Blakeburn, whereof he is appealed, as the king learns by inquisition taken by the sheriff that Adam slew Gilbert in self-defence.

Feb. 7. Westminster.

To Master Henry de Bray, escheator this side Trent. Order to deliver to Lucy, late the wife of Guy, son and heir of Almaric de Sancto Amando, tenant in chief, the following of Almaric's lands, which were in the king's hands by reason of the minority of Guy and are still in his wardship by reason of the minority of Almaric, Guy's brother and heir, which the king has assigned to Lucy in dower: the manor of Cotes, which is extended at 42l. 2s. 11½d. yearly; a third of the manor of Cerney, which third is extended at 9l. 4s. 0d. yearly; a third of the manor of Wamberge, which third is extended at 70s. 4d. yearly; a third of the manor of Netherhaven, which third is extended at 6l. yearly; a third of the manor of Ippelpenne, which third is extended at 13l. 6s. 8d.; a third of the manor of Catton-on-Trent, which third is extended at 6l. yearly; a third of the manor of Widehaye, which third is extended at 4l. 15s.; and 68s. 1d. of yearly rent in Nutteleye; a third of the manor of Melebrok, which third is extended at 13l. 8s. 11d. yearly, and beyond the extent of the third part 12s. yearly of land and rent in the said manor of increment.

Memorandum, that the manors of Brokesham (sic), Grendon, and Hyldesle, which Lucy had in tenancia until her dower was assigned to her, shall remain wholly to Almaric, Guy's brother and heir, in recompence for the manor of Cotes, which is assigned to Lucy in dower.

To Walter de la Haye, escheator of Ireland. Like order to deliver to Lucy a third of the manor of Baligorman in Ireland, which third is extended at 22l. 6s. 8d.

Feb. 7. Westminster.

To Master Henry de Bray, escheator this side Trent. Order to deliver to Ralph de Berners a third of the manor of Lillesle and all issues thereof, as the king learns by inquisition that Ralph demised to William de Monte Caniso of Edwardeston the said third for fifteen years, for 7l. 16s. 1¾d. yearly, and that William paid to him 60[l.] beforehand for the ferm for nine years, so that the ferm for the other six years remains to be rendered to Ralph, and also that it was agreed between William and Ralph that after the lapse of the said fifteen years William should hold the third part for life, rendering therefor 12l. yearly, which third Master H. de Bray, the escheator, took into the king's hands for certain trespasses that William was said to have committed, together with William's other lands, and that he holds them without paying to Ralph the ferm aforesaid. It is provided that Ralph shall restore the third to the king or to William, if he be released from prison, if the king wish to have it, rendering therefor to Ralph the ferm aforesaid.

Feb. 8. Westminster.

To the sheriff of Northumberland. Order to deliver in bail Godfrey le Taillur of Morpath, imprisoned at Newcastle-on-Tyne for the death of Ranulph son of Duncan, wherewith he is charged, as the king learns by the testimony of Guichard de Charrum, Richard Knout, and Walter de Camhou, justices to deliver the gaol of Newcastle-on-Tyne, that Godfrey slew Ranulph in self-defence.

To Master Henry de Bray, escheator this side Trent. Order to restore to John de Britannia, earl of Richmond, the manor of Ledenham, which the escheator took into the king's hands by reason of the death of Roger de Colevill, as it is testified before the king that Roger held nothing of the king in chief at his death as of the crown by reason whereof the custody of his lands ought to pertain to the king, and the king understands that Roger held the aforesaid manor of John de Britannia by knight service.

To the treasurer and barons of the exchequer. Order to cause Deutaytus Guillelmi to be acquitted of 50 marks for the issues of 10l. yearly of land in co. Buckingham, as the late king ordered Nicholas de Yatinden and his fellows, appointed to hear and determine trespasses done in time of war in co. Buckingham, to assign to Ingram de Vilers 10l. of land yearly, to have for five years according to the Dictum of Keneylworth, and the justices caused 10l. yearly of land of Hugh de Gyrunde's, [in the king's hands] by his forfeiture, to be delivered to Ingram, which land Ingram delivered to Deutaytus for the debts due to him.

Feb. 10. Westminster.

To the keeper of the park of Pederton. Order to cause the attorneys of Queen Eleanor, the king's consort, to have in that park twenty oaks fit for timber for her use, of the king's gift.

Feb. 10. Westminster.

To the sheriff of Somerset. Order to restore to John Huscarl, clerk, his lands, goods and chattels, which were taken into the king's hands upon his being charged before Robert de Sancto Claro and his fellows, justices appointed to deliver Sumerton goal, with homicide, as he has purged his innocence before R. Bishop of Bath and Wells, to whom he was delivered by the justices in accordance with the privilege of the clergy.

Vacated, because he did not have the writ.

To Master Henry de Bray, escheator this side Trent. Order to restore the issues of the lands that William de Alba Marla held of other lords than the king, as the king, upon learning by inquisition taken by the escheator that William at his death held nothing of the king in chief except of the barony of Hurberton, which is in the king's hands, ordered the escheator not to intermeddle with the lands that William held of other lords.

Feb. 12. Westminster.

To the sheriff of Hertford. Order to cause proclamation to be made in his full county [court] that a market shall be held on Thursday in every week at the king's manor of Langeleye, and that a fair shall be held there on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday in Whitsun week hereafter, as the king wills that such market and fair shall be held. By K.

To the treasurer and chamberlains. Order to deliver to Ralph de Hengham and his fellows, justices to hear pleas, all rolls, writs and records of pleas held before them in the thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth years of the king's reign, in order that they may more conveniently determine the pleas begun before them for the time aforesaid.

The like to the same to deliver the rolls of Thomas de Weylaund and his fellows, late justices of the Bench for the same years, to Elias de Bekingham, and Master John Luvel, or to him who supplies his place in the Bench.

Feb. 14. Westminster.

To William de Vescy, justice of the Forest beyond Trent. Order to cause Robert Tibotot to have in the forest of Shirewod fifty oaks fit for timber with their strippings, of the king's gift.

Feb. 15. Westminster.

To Master Henry de Bray, escheator this side Trent. Order to cause John, son and heir of John la Veyle, to have seisin of the lands that his father held in chief, as the king has taken his homage.

To the same. Order to cause dower to be assigned to Joan, late the wife of John de Bosco, tenant in chief, upon her taking oath not to marry without the king's licence.

Feb. 17. Westminster.

To the treasurer and barons of the exchequer of Dublin. Order to cause Robert Bagot to be acquitted of 18l. due to that exchequer, as the king has pardoned him this sum.

To the sheriff of Devon. Order to cause a coroner for that county to be elected in place of Richard de Bello Monte, lately elected, who is incapacitated by illness and infirmity.

To the sheriff of Middlesex. Order to cause to be delivered to William son of John Pippard, lately in the custody of Adam de Stretton by reason of his minority, the lands of his inheritance, which were taken into the king's hands with Adam's lands, as the king learns by inquisition taken by William de Karleton and Hugh de Cressingham that the said William is of full age and is the next heir of Lucy, late the wife of the aforesaid John, and mother of William.

Membrane 14—Schedule.

Feb. 12. Westminster.

To Stephen de Penecestre, warden of the Cinque Ports. Order to cause proclamation to be made throughout his bailiwick prohibiting all persons, under pain of loss of their goods and chattels, from taking out of the realm or causing to be taken out any timber, brushwood or charcoal (carbonem) without the king's licence, as the king learns that many men cause timber, brushwood and charcoal to be taken from Sussex and Kent to divers places by sea (per partes maritimas), whereby inestimable damage may arise to the king and the men of those parts when they need such things. Endorsed: Ballivi habent.

Membrane 13.

Feb. 15. Westminster.

Andrew Werbaud of Merston, imprisoned at Norwich for the death of William son of Robert de Paston, wherewith he is charged, has letters to the sheriff of Norfolk to bail him.

To the treasurer and barons of the exchequer. Order to cause Nicholas de Menill to be acquitted of 100s. at which he was amerced before William de Vescy and his fellows, justices last in eyre for pleas of the Forest in co. York for a default, as the king has pardoned him.

Feb. 18. Westminster.

To the justices appointed for the custody of the Jews. Order, at the instance of Edmund, the king's brother, to open the old chest of the chirographers and to inspect the charters and deeds of Aaron son of Vyves, Edmund's Jew, to wit as well those found in the chest that he can prove before them to be his as those enrolled in the rolls of the exchequer of the Jewry and that are in the treasury of the Jewry, and to distrain the debtors to render the debts contained in the charters and deeds according to the law and custom of the Jewry, and to cause his charters and deeds found in the treasury aforesaid to be withdrawn and placed in the chest aforesaid, so that the Jew may have his recovery (recuperare) for the said debts more conveniently.

To the bailiff of Odyham for the time being. The king, compassionating the weakness of body (imbecillitati) of Robert called 'Dobbe,' his parker of Odyham, has granted to him 1d. daily for life in increase of his wages that he receives for the custody of the park, and orders the bailiff to pay this sum daily together with his wages. Et sunt patentes.

Feb. 13. Westminster.

[To the sheriff of Lincoln.] Order to cause the keeper of the altar of St. Mary in the church of West Rasen to have seisin of a messuage and 1½ acres of meadow in West Rasen that John de Brunne of West Rasen, who abjured the realm for felony, held, as the king learns by inquisition taken by the sheriff of Lincoln that the messuage and land have been in the king's hands for a year and a day, and that John held them of God and the aforesaid altar, and that the township of West Rasen ought to answer to the king for the year, day and waste thereof.

Like order to the same in favour of Stephen son of Stephen Sibry of West Rasen for 1½ acres in West Rasen that the aforesaid John held of him.

Like order to the same in favour of Robert Rote of Toft for half an acre of land in West Rasen, which the said John de Brun[n]e held of him.

Like order to the same in favour of John son of John de Camera of West Rasen for 3½ acres of land and 2 acres of meadow in West Rasen that the aforesaid John held of him.

Feb. 24. Henley.

To the sheriff of Northampton. Order to cause a verderer for the forest of Rokingham to be elected in place of Ralph Peverel, deceased.

Feb. 18. Westminster.

To the sheriff of Sussex. Order to deliver in bail Laurence le Beel, imprisoned at Guldeford for the death of William son of Adam le Despenser, wherewith he is charged, as the king learns by the record of Richard de Boylaund, John Pecche, Luke de Vienna, and Roland de Acsted, justices appointed to deliver that gaol, that Laurence slew William in self-defence.

To the treasurer and barons of the exchequer. Order to cause John de Warenna, earl of Surrey, to be acquitted of 189l. 6s. 8d. for the issues of his lands forfeited before the justices last in eyre in co. Sussex from any cause.

Feb. 23. Chippenham.

To Roger Lestrange, justice of the Forest this side Trent. Order to cause Robert Burnel, bishop of Bath and Wells, to have in the forest of Essex six live bucks and fourteen live does, of the king's gift, in order to stock his park of Borham.

To Ralph Rastel, keeper of the forest of Essex. Order not to hinder R. bishop of Bath and Wells from enclosing his wood of Borham with a ditch and palings without a hedge, and from making a park there, as the king has granted licence to him to enclose the wood and to hold the park thus enclosed and made to him and his heirs.

On this day, to wit 24 February, R. bishop of Bath and Wells, the chancellor, went from court to his bishopric; on which day the king's seal was delivered into the wardrobe for custody there to Master W. de Marchia.
