7 Richard I. (1195-96). 

(i) This is the final concord made in the court of the lord the King 
at Westminster on the day of St. Edward the King, in the seventh 
year of King Richard, before H [ubert], Archbishop of Canterbury, G. 
Archdeacon of Hereford, Osbert son of Hervey, Simon de Patishull, 
Master Thomas de Husseborn, Richard de Herierd, then Justices, and 
other trusty servants of the lord the King then there present. Between 
William de Perci, plaintiff, and Herbert, Bishop of Salisbury, tenent, 
of the whole vill of Cherdestokes with the appurtenances. Whereupon 
a plea was summoned between them in the court aforesaid, that is to 
say the aforesaid William has quit claimed all the right and claim 
which he had in the aforesaid vill with the appurtenances for himself 
and his heirs to the aforesaid Herbert the bishop and his successors for 
ever. And for this fine and concord and quit claim the said Herbert 
the bishop gave to the aforesaid William twenty marcs of silver and 
one warhorse of the price of fifty shillings. 

(2) At Westminster, Thursday next after the Invention of the Holy 
Cross, between Richard de Sifrewast, plaintiff, and Juliana de Clavill, 
who was wife of William de Clavill, tenent, of thirty ac. of wood 
in Mordon. Plaintiff remitted the claim he had against the tenent 
saving his right after her death. For this Juliana gave to Richard five 
marcs of silver. 

8 Richard I. (1196-97). 

(3, new number 4) At Westminster, Tuesday next after the octave 
of the Purification, between Helyas de Thore, plaintiff, and Helyas de 
Wrockeshal, tenent, of three virgates of land in Pippes ; the tenent ac- 
knowledged the land to be the right and inheritance of the said Helyas de 
Thore to hold of him and his heirs to the tenent and his heirs by such 
service as belongs to three virgates of land, whereof twenty virgates 
make the service of one knight's fee in the said vill. For this Helyas 
de Thore gave to Helyas de Wrockeshale one hundred shillings Stirling. 

(4, new number 3) At Westminster, Friday next after the octave of 
St. Hillary, between William de Solers and Mabel his mother, plaintiffs. 



Dorset Fines, 



and Alan Botel, tenent, of the manor of Hamford in Dorset The tenent 
remitted and quit claimed all the right and claim which he had in the 
land to the plaintiffs for ever. For this William and Mabel gave to 
Alan five marcs of land in Bundebi and afler Alan's death the land 
shall revert to William and his heirs. Moreover, William and Mabel 
gave to Alan and Cecilia his wife nine shillings of land in Elingheham 
to hold for life. After their death the said land shall revert to William 
and his heirs. William and Mabel will warrant the land to Alan as long 
as he lives. And, moreover, William and Mabel gave to Alan eleven 

marcs of silver and oxen. Be it known that Alan and Cecilia or 

the longer liver of them shall hold for life the said nine shillings of 
rent in Elingheham. 

9 Richard I. (1197-98). 

(3, new number 6) At Westminster, in the octave of St. Martin, 
between Robert son of Ralph, plaintiff, and Ralph de Winesham, tenent, 
of three virgates of land in Widihoc. Plaintiff, remitted and quit claimed 
all the right he had in the land for himself and his heirs for ever to Ralph 
and his heirs. For this the tenent granted to Robert son of Ralph 
and his heirs one messuage, which Galet held, six ac. of land, and 
two ac. of meadow which Galet held. To hold from Ralph de 
Winesham and his heirs for ever by free service of sixpence yearly 
for all service, to be rendered at Michaelmas. And besides Ralph 
gave to the plaintiff one marc of silver. 

(6, new number 5) At Westminster, in the vigil of St. Simon and 
St. Jude, between Roger son of Henry, plaintiff, and William son of 
Reginald, tenent, of the vill of Lolesworhe, except Wlfeuecume. The 
plaintiff remitted and quit claimed to William and his heirs all the right 
and claim which he had in the same for himself and his heirs for ever. 
For this the tenent gave to Roger son of Henry fifteen marcs of silver, 
and William and his heirs shall hold the land from Roger and his heirs 
by the free service of one knight. Wlfeuecume aforesaid remains to 
Roger and his heirs. 

10 Richard I. (1198-99). 

(7, new number 8) At Westminster, Thursday next before St. Peter 
in cathedra^ between Alured de Lincoln, plaintiff, and Walter de Wudiete, 
tenent, of the service of the tenement which Walter held from the plaintiff 
namely the service of two and a half knights' fees. The plaintiff 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs the service of one 
knight's fee to Walter and his heirs. Thus, Walter and his heirs 
shall hold from Alured and his heirs land which is of Alured*s fee in 
Meleburn by the service of half a knight, and in Widiate by the service 
of one knight for all service. For this, the tenent granted and quit 



2 John (1200-01). 



claimed for himself and his heirs all his right in the land of Tarente to 
Alured and his heirs for ever, which William de Vilers held. And be 
it known that if Walter should die before William his son, William 
shall by this fine be quit respecting his relief, against Alured and his 
heirs. 

(8, new number 7) At Westminster, in the octave of St. Blasius, 
between Cristiana daughter of William Clunt, plaintiff, and Ermengard, 
Prioress of Clerkenwell, tenent, of half a virgate of land in Blaneford. 
The plaintiff remitted and quit claimed all her right in the same for 
herself and her heirs to the Prioress and her successors for ever. For 
this the Prioress gave to the plaintiff four marcs of silver. 

UNKNOWN COUNTIES (? DORSET). 

7 Richard I. (1195-96). 

(16) At Westminster, Sunday next before the feast of All Saints, 
between Emald Faber, plaintiff, and William le Whitemersse, tenent, 
of half a virgate and three acres of land in Stokes. Recognizance 
ofmort ancestor was summoned between them. Ernald quit claimed 
forever his right and claim in the land for himself and his heirs to 
William and his heirs. For this William granted to Ernald two 
acres of the same land in the field called Rading towards the north, 
to hold from William and his heirs to Ernald and his heirs by the free 
service of six pence to be rendered at the Annunciation of the Blessed 
Mary three pence, and at Michaelmas three pence for all, save foreign, 
service. 



2 John (1200-01). 

(i) At Westminster, fifteen days after the feast of St. John Baptist, 
between Hamo de Catesclive and Felicia his wife, daughter of Stephen 
de Burgestok, plaintiffs, and John Abbot of Ford, tenent, of four hides 
of land in Burgestok and in Catesclive. The Abbot acknowledged and 
granted the land in Catesclive in wood ... in rent, in reliefs, in . . . 
and in customs to be the right. ... To hold from him (the Abbot) 
and his successors, to him and his heirs for ever by the free . . . five 
shillings and . . . yearly to be rendered at Michaelmas at Ford quit 
of all other secular service which belongs or may belong to the Abbot 
or his successors saving foreign service, unless it be scutage. For 
this the plaintiffs remitted and quit claimed for themselves and their 
heirs to the Abbot and his successors all their right and claim in the 
land of Burgestok for ever. And for this the Abbot gave to the plaintiffs 
ten marcs of silver, 



Dorset Fines, 



3 John (1201-02). 

(2) At Taunton, in the octave of St John Baptist, between Beatrice, 
who was the wife of Robert de Ver, plaintiff, and Alan de Ver, tenent, 
of one virgate of land in Cerne which Beatrice claims in dower as being 
the free hold of her late husband. The tenent acknowledged the land 
to be the dower of Beatrice. For this Beatrice granted all the said land 
to the tenent to hold to himself and his heirs from Beatrice during her 
life by the free service of one pound of pepper or six pence yearly to be 
rendered at the feast of St Giles, for all save foreign service. 

(3) At Taunton, in the octave of St. John Baptist, between Beatrice 
who was the wife of Robert de Ver, plaintiff, and Calsweinus, tenent, 
of half a virgate of land in Cerne which Beatrice claims in dower as 
being the freehold of her late husband. The tenent acknowledged 
the land to be the dower of Beatrice. For this Beatrice granted all 
the said land to the tenent to hold to himself and his heifs from 
Beatrice during her life, rendering therefor yearly twelve pence, namely 
at Christmas six pence and at Easter six pence for all, save foreign, 
service. And for this grant Calsweinus gave to Beatrice one marc. 

(4) At Ivelcestre, Friday next before the feast of St Barnabas, 
between Warin de Raleghe, plaintiff, by Simon Fluri in his place, 
and Simon son of Walter, tenent, of half a knight's fee in Pilesdon. 
Recognizance of the great assize was summoned between them. The 
tenent acknowledged the land to be the right of Warin de Raleghe. 
For this Warin granted to Simon son of Walter the said land, to 
hold to him and his heirs from Warin and his heirs for ever by the 
service of half a knight's fee for all service. And for this grant the 
tenent gave to Warin all his land of Cruke to hold to him and his 
heirs from Simon son of Walter and his heirs by the service of the 
fourth part of a knight's fee for all service. 

(5) At Sireburn, fifteen days after Trinity, between Hugh Witeng, 
plaintiff, and Cristiana Nanan, tenent, by Robert son of Reginald in 
her place, of half a hide of land in Pedis (ix. Plush). Recognizance 
of the great assize was summoned between them. Cristiana ac- 
knowledged the land to be the right and inheritance of the plaintiff. 
For this Hugh granted the said land to Cristiana to hold during her 
life from Hugh and his heirs by the service of a tenth part of a knight's 
fee for all service. After Cristiana's death the land shall revert to 
Robert son of Reginald, to hold to him and his heirs from Hugh 
and his heirs by the service aforesaid. This concord was made at 
Cristiana's wish she then being present. 

(6) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter, between William 
son of Robert, plaintiff, and Herbert, Bishop of Salisbury, tenent. 



3 John (1201-02). 



by Ralph de Winesham in the Bishop's place, of one hide and a half 
of land in Cerdestoke. Recognizance of mort ancestor was summoned 
between thepn. William son of Robert remitted and quit claimed all 
his right and claim in the land to the Bishop and his successors from 
him and his heirs for ever. For this the Bishop gave the plaintiff 
thirty marcs of silver. The one hide and a half of land in Cerdestoke 
is called Bielege. 

(7) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter, between Wido de 
Osteilly and Philippa his wife, plantiffs, by Wido himself in Philippa's 
place, and William de Witefeld and Matilda his wife, tenents, by William 
himself in Matilda's place, of the whole vill of Pumemolle, which 
Philippa claims in dower as by gift from Robert de Mustiers formerly her 
husband. The tenents acknowledged the whole vill to be the dower of 
Philippa and rendered the same to Wido and Philippa to hold by name 
of dower during Philippa's life, after whose death the vill shall revert 
to Matilda and her heirs quit and absolutely. For this Wido and 
Philippa have rendered and quit claimed to William and Matilda and 
Matilda's heirs all the land which Philippa formerly held in dower in 
[Luvejford in Berie and in Wergerod by gift from Robert de Musters. 
Moreover, Wido and Philippa have given to William and Matilda 
twenty-six marcs of silver. 

(8) At Sireburn, fifteen days after Trinity, between Ralph de 
Chaunedon and Sibilla his wife, plaintiffs, and Roger Abbot of 
Abedesber, tenent, of one virgate of land in Waie. Recognizance of 
mort ancestor was summoned between them. The plaintiffs remitted 
and quit claimed for themselves and their heirs all their right and 
claim in the land to the Abbot and his successors for ever. For this 
the Abbot remitted and quit claimed to Ralph and Sibilla and their 
heirs twelve pence yearly out of half a marc which they were ac- 
customed to render to him yearly in respect of two virgates and a half 
of land, and one half of a mill in Waie, which they hold from the 
Abbot, so that where they were accustomed to render one marc, now 
they only render twelve shillings and four pence. Moreover, the 
Abbot gave them one marc of silver. 

(9) At Sireburn, fifteen days after Trinity, between Christiana 
daughter of Geoffrey, plaintiff, and William Selke and Isabella his 
wife and Richard son of Nicolas, and Alice his wife, tenents, of halt 
a virgate of land and half a capital messuage in Thome. Recognizance 
of mort ancestor was summoned between them. The tenents ac- 
knowledged the property to be the right of Cristiana and remitted 
and quit claimed the same for them and their heirs, to Cristiana and 
her heirs for ever. For this William de Vergelai, son and heir of 
Cristiana, then there present, and Ereburga his wife remitted and quit 



Dorset Fines. 



claimed to Richard son of Nicolas and Alice his wife and their heirs, 
four ac. of land in Oskereswell which William and Ereburga, claim to 
hold in marriage by gift of Richard against the same Richard son of 
Nicolas and Alice. 

(lo) At Sireburn, Wednesday next after the feast of St. Augustine, 
between Richard son of Ralph, plaintiff, and William, Abbot of 
Sireburne, tenent, by Henry de Haddone in the Abbot's place, of one 
virgate of land in Feliet Recognizance of mort ancestor was sum- 
moned between them. The plaintiff remitted and quit claimed all his 
right and claim in the land to the Abbot and his successors for ever. 
For this the Abbot gave to Richard six marcs of silver. 

(ii) At Syreburn, fifteen days after Trinity, between Robert de 
Stafford, plaintiff, and Nigel de Liwelle, tenent, of half a hide of land 
in Liwelle. Recognizance of the great assize was summoned between 
them. Nigel acknowledged the land to be the right of Robert, For 
this the plaintiff granted the land to Nigel, to hold to him and his 
heirs from Robert and his heirs for ever, doing therefor foreign service 
such as belongs to three virgates of land for all service. And for this 
grant N^igel for himself and his heirs quit claimed to Robert and his 
heirs twelve ac. of land out of the said land in Liwelle namely : six 
ac. next to Dunfald, of Quintin the clerk towards the east and six ac. 
next the land of Nigel towards the north. Thus Nigel and his heirs 
shall do as much foreign service to Robert and his heirs as belongs 
to the aforesaid half hide of land, less the aforesaid twelve acres. 

(12) At Sireburn, fifteen days after Trinity, between William son 
of Osmund, plaintiff, and William son of Robert, tenent, of five ac. of 
land in Fernham. Recognizance of the great assize was summoned 
between them. The tenent acknowledged the land to be the right of 
William son of Osmund. For this the plaintiff granted to William 
son of Robert the said land to hold to him and his heirs from William 
son of Osmund for ever, by the free service of ten pence yearly to be 
rendered at Michaelmas five pence and at Easter five pence for all, 
save foreign, service. And for this grant William son of Robert gave 
to William son of Osmund half a mark of silver. 

(13) At Westminster, in three weeks of Easter, between Walter de 
Ferleg and Joan, his wife, plaintiffs, by the said Walter in Joan's place, 
and Ralph de Brueria and Muriel, his wife, tenents, by the said Ralph 
in Muriel's place, of one virgate and a half of land in Bradeford. Ralph 
and Muriel acknowledged the land to be the right of the plaintiffs to hold 
from Ralph and Muriel and the heirs of Muriel to Walter and Joan and 
the heirs of Joan for ever by the free service of one pound of pepper 
yearly for all, save foreign, service, to be rendered at Christmas. For 
this the plaintiffs rendered and quit claimed for themselves and their 



3 John (1201-02). 



heirs to Ralph and Muriel and the heirs of Muriel^ half a hide of land in 
Heidon for ever, which Walter and Joan formerly held from Ralph and 
Muriel. And Ralph and Muriel and the heirs of Muriel will warrant 
the said one virgate and a half of land to the plaintiffs for ever against 
all people, and if they cannot warrant it they will give them in exchange 
the value of the land. 

(14) At Tanton, in the octave of St John Baptist, between Alured 
Aurifaber and Lucia his wife, plaintiffs, and Cecilia de Kadesheia and 
Lambert her son, tenents, of three virgates of land in Herstanesheia. 
The tenents acknowledged the same to be the right and inheritance of 
Lucia, and for themselves and their heirs rendered and quit claimed it to 
Alured and Lucia and their heirs for ever. For this the plaintiffs gave 
to Cecil and Lambert thirty marks of silver. And the plaintiffs have 
given and granted to John, Abbot of Ford, the said three virgates of 
land to hold from them to the Abbot and his successors for ever by the 
service of half a marc of silver yearly, to be rendered forty pence at 
Michaelmas and forty pence at Easter, for all service and exaction save 
foreign service. And for this gift and grant the Abbot acquitted the 
plaintiffs of the aforesaid thirty marks. If any of the above parties or 
their heirs shall hold any deed made between the above parties, in the 
time of King Henry, which shall be against this chirograph it shall be 
reputed void. 

(15) At Sirebum, in the octave of Trinity, between William 
Forestarius, plaintiff, and William de Kaaines, tenent, of one virgate of 
land in Tarente. Recognizance of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. The tenent acknowledged the land to be the right of 
William Forestarius and rendered it to him, and William Forestarius 
gave and granted it to Robert, son of Michael, then there present, in 
marriage with his daughter Amabilia, to hold to him and his heirs born 
of her, from William de Kaaines and his heirs for ever, by free service 
of a pair of gilt spurs or six pence yearly, to be rendered at Easter, for 
all,, save foreign, service. For this the aforesaid Robert gave to 
William de Kaaines two marcs of silver and two bezants. 

(16) At Tanton, in the octave of St. John Baptist, between Robert 
de Warmewule, plaintiff, and William de Hineton, tenent, of half a hide 
of land in Pidele Edwaker. Recognizance of mort ancestor was 
summoned between them. The plaintiff remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs all his right and claim in the land to William de 
Hineton and his heirs for ever. For this the tenent gave to Robert de 
Warmewule three marcs of silver. 

(17) At Sirebum, fifteen days after Trinity, between Alan de Morton, 
plaintiff, and Ralph de Morton, tenent, of three virgates of land in 
Lodrea. Recognizance of mort ancestor was summoned between them. 



8 Dorset Fines. 



The tenent acknowledged the land to be the right of Alan, who^ for 
this, granted the same to Ralph to hold to him and his heirs from 
plaintiff and his heirs for ever by the free service of half a marc yearly 
for all, save foreign, service, namely, at Michaelmas forty pence and at 
Easter forty pence. And for this grant Ralph gave Alan twenty 
marcs of silver. Ralph must pay his rent himself, or send it by his 
messenger, every year at Morton at the terms aforesaid. 

(i8) At Tanton, in the octave of St. John Baptist, between Isolda, 
who was the wife of Andrew, plaintiff, and Herbert de St. Quintin, 
tenent, of the reasonable dower of Isolda in Teversict, which was the 
freehold of her late husband. The plaintiff remitted and quit claimed all 
her right and claim in the same dower to Herbert and his heirs for ever. 
For this Herbert gave to Isolda three marcs of silver. 

(19) At Sireburn, fifteen days after Trinity, between Herbert de 
Hausweie, plaintiff, and William, Abbot of Sireburn, tenent, of one hide 
of land in Cumpton. Recognizance of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. The plaintiff, remitted and quit claimed for himself 
and his heirs all his right and claim in the land to the Abbot and his 
successors for ever. For this the Abbot gave to Herbert fifty marcs of 
silver. 

(20) At Sireburn, fifteen days after Trinity, between Robert, Abbot 
of Maumesberia, plaintiff, by John de Foxle and Philip the clerk in the 
Abbot's place, and Adam, son of Hugh Denser, tenent, of one virgate 
of land in Winterbum Albi Monasterii [Winterburn Whitechurch] . 
The tenent acknowleged the land to be the right of the Abbot and his 
church of Maumesberia. For this the Abbot granted the land to Adam, 
to hold to Adam and his heirs from the Abbot and his successors for 
ever, by the free service of ten shillings yearly, to be rendered at 
Michaelmas five shillings, and the feast of the Annunciation five 
shillings, and to render therefore yearly to the Abbot and his successors 
for the herbage of the said virgate of land, a tenth of all lambs which he 
who shall hold the land shall have, either of his own or others, in the 
pasture belonging to that land, saving a tenth of the said lambs first to 
be given to the mother Church, for all, save foreign, service. Moreover, 
the Abbot gave to Adam forty shillings sterling. 

(21) At Sireburn, fifteen days after Trinity, between Roger, Abbot 
of Abbedesber, plaintiff, and Walter de Karenton and Claricia his 
wife, tenents, of two hides of land in Tingledon. The Abbot granted 
the land to the tenents to hold to them and their heirs from him and 
his successors for ever by the free service of twenty shillings yearly 
to be rendered at Michaelmas ten shillings and at Easter ten shillings. 
And the service of four loads of myrtle [summarum mirti] to be 
rendered at the feast of St. Peter ad Vincula to the '* medarius " for 



John (1201-02). 



all, save foreign, service. And the " medarius" shall give two meals 
to the carriers of the myrtle. And the Abbot and his successors shall 
give yearly to Walter and Claricie one cheese of the best kind of the 
court of Bidele. And for this grant Walter and Claricie gave to the 
Abbot six shillings, and half a marc to the convent. 

(22) At Syreburn, fifteen days after Trinity, between Hubert son 
of William, plaintiff) and Richard de Godmaneston and Mabilia his 
wife, tenents, of four acres of land in Godmaneston. Recognizance 
of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Hubert remitted for 
himself and his heirs to Richard and Mabilia and their heirs all his 
right and claim in the land for ever. For this the tenents gave to 
Hubert two acres near the aforesaid land, of which one is in Radelande 
in Marleria and the other near the land of Gervase towards the south. 
To hold to Hubert and his heirs from William son of Robert, the 
chief lord and his heirs, by the foreign service which belongs thereto. 
And moreover William, son of Robert, chief lord of the fee of God- 
maneston, who was present, granted to the said Hubert and his heirs 
two acres of land of his demesne in the said vill, namely one acre 
which lies beyond the garden of the said Richard towards the north 
and one acre which is next to the road towards the east, in Cumbe, 
to hold from him and his heirs by foreign service. 

(23) At Westminster, one month after Trinity, between Agneta, 
daughter of Philip, plaintiff, and William Yrisse, tenent, of half a 
hide of land in Derham. Agneta remitted and quit claimed to the 
tenent and his heirs all her right and claim in the land for herself and her 
heirs for ever. For this William gave to Agneta seven marcs of silver. 

(24) At Syreburn, fifteen days after Trinity, between Avicia de 
Dun, plaintiff, and the Abbot of Cerne, tenent, of a certain common 
of pasture in Blokeswurthe. Avicia shall have common in the said 
pasture, as Robert de Dun, one time her husband, had on the day he 
died, as muc6 as belongs to one hide of land and a half in Blokeswrthe. 
Neither Avicia and her heirs nor the Abbot and his successors may 
sow corn in the said pasture without each others assent and wish. 

(25) At Westminster, in the octave of St. Yllar, between Eudo 
Martell, plaintiff, and Adam Syrad, tenent, of one virgate of land in 
Parva Maene. Eudo remitted and quit claimed for himself and his 
heirs all his right and claim in the said land to Adam and his heirs 
for ever. For this Adam granted and quit claimed for himself and 
his heirs to the plaintiff and his heirs three ac. of land in the said vill 
which lie below the garden of the plaintiff, who in exchange therefore 
granted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Adam and his 
heirs three ac. of land in Brademaene, namely two ac. which Robert 
Palmer held and one ac. which lies near them towards the east, for ever. 



lo Dorset Fines. 



(26) At Sireburn, Tuesday next after the feast of St. Augustine, be- 
tween Richard son of Ralph, plaintiff, and Ralph de Winesham, tenent, 
of three virgates of land in Wodehoc, Richard remitted and quit claimed 
for himself and his heirs all his right and claim in the same to the 
tenent and his heirs for ever. For this Ralph granted to the plaintiff 
one virgate of land in Derham which he, Ralph, formerly held in 
demesne. To hold from the tenent and his heirs to Richard and his 
heirs for ever by the free service of half a marc yearly for all, save 
foreign, service. To be rendered, at Michaelmas forty pence and at 
Easter, forty pence. 

4 John (1202-03). 

(27) At Witon, Wednesday next after the feast of St. Peter ad 
Vincula, between Amicia de Bosco, plaintiff, and Richard son of 
Adam, tenent, of twenty ac. of land in Kerichel. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Amicia remitted and quit 
claimed for herself and her heirs all her right and claim in the said 
land to Richard and his heirs for ever. For this the tenent granted 
to Amicia eight ac. of land in Kerechel, namely, four ac. in one field 
and four ac. in another, that is to say, those in one field, one ac. 
at Senethorn, one ac. at the meadow of Teobald de Kerechel, one ac. 
behind the yard of Thomas de Kerechel, and one ac. in Brocforlang, 
and in the other field two ac. beyond the Court of Gades and at 
Landshori one ac. and one ac. at the moor. To hold to Amicia 
and her heirs from Richard and his heirs for ever by the free 
service of four pence halfpenny yearly for all, save foreign, service, 
to be rendered at Michaelmas. 

(28) At Witon, Saturday next after the octave of the Apostles 
Peter and Paul, between William le Fine, plaintiff, and Mathew de 
St. Edward, tenent, of half a hide of land in Teffunt, in which he has 
no entry unless by the pledging of William son of Adelard father of 
the aforesaid William le Fine. The tenent acknowledged the land to 
be the right and inheritance of William le Fine, who, for this, granted 
the said land for himself and his heirs to Mathew and his heirs for 
a term of five years, from Michaelmas next after the date of this 
chirograph by the service which belongs thereto, to be paid yearly to 
Mary, Abbess of St. Edward and her successors as chief lord, and 
foreign service. At the end of the said term the land shall revert to 
William or his heirs freed ('^soluta") and quit from Mathew and his 
heirs for ever. 

(29) At Westminster, one month after Michaelmas, between Robert 
Malherbe, plaintiff, and Henry de Haddon tenent of two and a half 
hides of land in Candel Malherbe. Plea of warranty of deed was 



5 John (1203-04). II 



summoned between them. Robert acknowledged the land to be the 
right and inheritance of Henry, to hold to him and his heirs from 
Robert and his heirs for ever by the free service of one marc of silver 
yearly, and the fourth part of one knight's fee for all service. To be 
rendered at Michaelmas at the Court of Candell. For this Henry gave 
Robert forty marcs of silver. 

5 John (1203-04)- 

(30) At Westminster, one month after Easter, between Alan de 
St. George, plaintiff, and Brian de Tollard, tenent, of two virgates of 
land in Crechel, one carucate of land in Derewineston, one carucate of 
land in Hammes, one carucate of land in Tadeston and two carucates 
of land in Tollard. Alan remitted and quit claimed for himself and 
his heirs all the right and claim he had in the said land to Brian and 
his heirs for ever. For this Brian gave and granted to Alan, all his 
land of Ydekestorp and one hundred shillings of land in Parva Hammes 
and in Prestinton, with one virgate of land in Lega to procure those 
one hundred shillings of land. To hold to Brian and his heirs from 
Alan and his heirs who shall or may issue from Beatrice, one time wife 
of Alan, and mother of Brian. Doing for the land of Idekestorp the 
service of half a knight's fee for all service and for the land of Parva 
Hammes and Prestinton the service of the one twelfth part of one 
knight's fee for all service. Rendering yearly to Brian or his heirs 
for the said virgate in Lega two shillings and eight pence sterling, 
namely, at Christmas eight pence, at Easter eight pence, at the feast 
of St. John eight pence, at Michaelmas eight pence for all service. 
Should it happen such heirs of Beatrice shall have died, the land of 
Idekestorp, Parva Hammes, Prestinton and Lega shall revert to Brian 
or his heirs. Brian and his heirs will warrant to Alan and Beatrice 
and her heirs all the said land last above mentioned against all men. 
For this Brian acquitted Alan against the King of seventy marcs which 
he owed for a fine made with him for moving a plea of the said land 
against the said Brian. Moreover, Brian gave to Alan ten marcs on 
the other part 

(31) At Westminster, five weeks after Easter, between Ralph de la 
Bruere and Muriel his wife, plaintiffs, and William, Abbot of Scire- 
burne, tenent, of six and a half hides of land in Bradeford. Plea of 
homage was summoned between them, which land Ralph and Muriel 
claim from the Abbot and his successors by the service of one knight 
and a half, to be done therefore for all service. The Abbot acknowledged 
the land to be the right of Muriel, to hold to Ralph and Muriel and the 
heirs of Muriel from the Abbot and his successors for ever, by the free 
service of [four] pounds yearly for all, save foreign, service, besides the 



12 Dorset Fines. 



aforesaid service of one knight and a half, whereof the same Ralph and 
Muriel and the heirs of Muriel are quit, namely, at Nativity of St. John 
twenty shillings, at Michaelmas twenty shillings, at Christmas twenty 
shillings, and at Easter twenty shillings. For this grant Ralph and 
Muriel gave to the Abbot and convent one tun of wine of the price of 
forty shillings. 

And Maurice de London put in his claim in respect of that land. 

(32) At Westminster, one month after Easter, between Hubert, 
Bishop of Salisbury, plaintiff, by Hugh de Adinton in the Bishop's 
place, and Richard de Cockesden, tenent, of one virgate of land in 
Kockesdon. Richard acknowledged the land to be the right of the 
Bishop and the church of St. Mary of Salisbury. For this the Bishop 
granted to Richard and his heirs eight ac. of the said land which lie in 
Langeland towards the south, and seven acres and a half of land in the 
said vill, of the Bishop's demesne, which lie at Salteresthieme, to hold 
to him and his heirs from the Bishop and his successors for ever, by the 
free service of two shillings yearly for all, save foreign, service, namely, 
at Michaelmas twelve pence and at Easter twelve pence. For this 
grant Richard gave the Bishop one marc of silver. 

6 John (1204-05). 

(33) At Westminster, in the octave of Trinity, between Teodoricus 
de Holewrth and Juliana his wife, plaintiffs, and Adam de Meines, 
tenent, of two hides and one virgate of land in Wermewell. Recogni- 
zance of mort ancestor was summoned between them. The plaintiffs 
remitted and quit claimed to Adam and his heirs all their right and 
claim in the land for ever. For this Adam gave to Teodoricus and 
Juliana twenty nine shillings and six pence. 

(34) At the Old Temple, fifteen days after Easter, between Matillida 
de Tracy, plaintiff, and Robert de Sparkeford, tenent, of a third part of 
two and a half hides of land in Burkedon, which Matillida claims in 
dower by the gift of William, son of Richard, one time her husband. 
Matillida remitted and quit claimed to Robert and his heirs all her right 
and claim in the above land. For this Robert gave to Matillida eleven 
marcs of silver. 

(35) At Bristol, Monday next before the feast of St. Margaret, 
between Dionisius, Abbot of Cerne, plaintiff, by Philip de Watercumb 
in his place, and Roger de Leg, tenent, by Walter Camerarius in his 
place, of one hide of land in Litlebridie. Roger acknowledged the land 
to be the right of the Abbot and his church of St Peter of Cerne, and 
rendered and quit claimed the same to the Abbot and his successors 
and his church, from him and his heirs for ever. For this the Abbot 
gave to Roger sixty shillings sterling. 



7 John (1205-06). 13 



(36) At Westminster, in the octave of Trinity, between Idonia, who 
was the wife of Theodoricus de Wermewelle, plaintiff, and Adam de 
Meines, tenent, of the dower of Idonia, in respect of the freehold which 
was of Theodoricus, fonnerly her husband, in Wermewelle. Idonia 
remitted and quit claimed to Adam and his heirs her right and claim in 
the same. For this Adam granted to her one virgate of land with one 
messuage in Wermewelle, which William son of Stephen held, to hold 
during her life from Adam and his heirs by the free service of one pound 
of pepper yearly, to be rendered at Michaelmas for all, save royal, 
service. After Idonia* s death the land and messuage to revert to Adam 
and his heirs quit. 

(37) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Assumption of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary, between Richard de Sancto Pancratio and Con- 
stance his wife, plaintiffs, and Dionisius, Abbot of Cernel, tenent, of 
one hide and one virgate of land in Cern. Richard and Constance 
remitted and quit claimed all their right and claim in the land for them- 
selves and their heirs to the Abbot and his successors for ever. For 
this the Abbot gave to Richard and Constance twenty marcs of silver. 

(38) At Westminster, three (?) after Trinity, between William, 
Abbot of Scireburne, plaintiff, and Adam de Wodeton, tenent, of the 
service of two hides of land in Coriscumbe, whereof five hides of land 
make the service of one knight, and which service the Abbot demands 
from him. Adam acknowledged the said service to the Abbot and his 
successors and his church of St. Mary of Scireburne for ever. For this 
the Abbot gave to Adam forty shillings sterling. 

(39) At Westminster, three weeks after Michaelmas, between 
Nicolas son of Osann, plaintiff, and Waringerus de Bakeber, tenent, 
of four and a half virgates of land in Bakebere. Nicolas remitted and 
quit claimed for himself and his heirs all his right and claim in the 
land to Warengerus and his heirs for ever. For this the tenent granted 
to Nicolas and his heirs half a virgate of land in the said vill which 
he held of the fee of Richard son of Robert. To hold from him and 
his heirs for ever, doing therefore as much foreign service as belongs 
to half a virgate in the said vill. Moreover Warengarus gave to 
Nicolas sixty shillings sterling. 

7 John (1205-06). 

(40) At Teokesbr, Monday next after the octave of St. Hillary, 
between Richard Walensis, plaintiff, and Philip de Lega and Claricia 
his mother, tenents, of half a knight's fee in Alingetun. Richard 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Philip and 
Claricia all his right and claim in the same. For this the tenents gave 
and granted to Richard one hide of land in Stokes, except the wood 



14 Dorset Fines. 



called Essonewod which Philip retains. To have and to hold to 
Richard and his heirs from Philip and his heirs by the service of the 
seventh part of a knight's fee. Moreover Philip gave to him one 
hundred shillings and one coat of mail. 

(41) At Clarund, Wednesday next before the feast of St. George, 
between Henry Bret, plaintiff, and Ralph son of Richard, tenent, of 
all the land of Chauberge, which was of Robert son of Richard. Henry 
acknowledged the same to be the right of the tenent, to have and to 
hold from Henry and his heirs to the tenent and his heirs for ever, by 
the service of half a knight*s fee for all service and demands. For this 
Ralph gave to Henry sixty marcs of silver and Henry took the homage 
of Ralph at the Court, 

9 John (1207-08). 

(42) At Craneborne, Monday next before the feast of the Nativity 
of St. Mary, between Elias de Torre, plaintiff, by Robert le Ostage in 
his place, and Hugh le Bret, tenent, of half a hide of land in Hache- 
cumbe. Recognizance of mort ancestor was summoned between them. 
Elias remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Hugh and 
his heirs all his right and claim in the said land. For this Hugh gave 
Elias one hundred shillings sterling. 

(43) At Westminster, five weeks after Easter, between William de 
Beauveir, plaintiff, and William de Hywis, tenent, of half a hide of 
land in Hywis. William de Beauveir remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs to William de Hywis and his heirs all his right 
and claim in the said land for ever. For this William de Hywis gave 
William de Beauveir five marcs of silver. 

10 John (1208-09). 

(44) At Westminster, Sunday next after Ascension, between Adam 
de Wodeton, plaintiff, and Reginald de Ramesbir, tenent, of a moiety 
of two hides of land in Melepeis and a moiety of two hides and one 
virgate of land in Buwod, and a moiety of two hides in Maugerton, 
which moieties Adam claimed against him as his part of esnecy in 
respect of the freehold which was of Edelina formerly wife of William 
Constabularius. Whereupon a duel in arms was waged between them 
in the Court. Reginald acknowledged the said moieties to be the 
right of Adam. For this Adam granted the said moieties to Reginald 
to hold to him and his heirs from Adam and his heirs for ever, together 
with the other moieties, doing therefor foreign service, namely, the 
service of one knight and rendering yearly fifty shillings, at Michaelmas 
twenty five shillings and at Easter twenty five shillings- for all 
service. 



II John (1209-10). 15 

II John (1209-10). 

(45) At Gillingeh, in the octave of St. John Baptist, between 
Richard de Winlesore, plaintiff, and John, Abbot of Ford, tenent, of 
one knight's fee in Parva Windlesor. Richard acknowledged the same 
to be the right of the Abbot and his convent of Ford. To have and to 
hold to him and his successor and the convent from Richard and his 
heirs and to do foreign service which belongs to that fee for all service. 
For this the Abbot granted to Agnes, wife of Richard, one carucate 
of the said land, namely, one messuage by the chapel of All Saints 
towards the south and five cottages i^casa) next that messuage towards 
the north and a moiety of the culture called Bonewod towards the 
east, a moiety of the culture called Woghefiirlang towards the east, 
eight ac. of land which lie together in the culture of Whethill beyond 
the great road towards the south, twelve ac. of land which lie together 
in the said culture beyond the said road towards the north, a moiety of 
the culture called Fursfurlang towards the west, a moiety of the culture 
of Hulle towards the north, a moiety of the culture of Slade towards 
the east, a moiety of the culture of Standolfurlang towards the north, 
a moiety of the culture called Bidhcrewe towards the east, a moiety of 
the culture called Superior Cleiland towards the south, a moiety of the 
culture called Inferior Cleiland towards the north, two ac. which lie 
together in the culture next to the said Chapel towards the south, the 
meadow called Hokesmed; the meadow called Alnodesmed, the 
meadow on the north part of the road which extends from the 
aforesaid chapel to the monks grange, a moiety of the meadow 
of Carswill towards the south, the pasture which lies together 
from the mill which was Richard's in Parva Winlesor to the hedge 
which is above the boundary (divisa) of Mortesthorn, saving to 
the Abbot and his successors common of turbary which is in the 
said pasture for his reasonable estovers in the said vill. And the 
Abbot and his successors may make a water-mill in the said pasture 
if they wish, and lead water to the mill by the said pasture where 
to them is most convenient, a moiety of the wood of Langel towards 
the south, a moiety of the wood of Widges towards the east, a moiety 
of the wood of Milalre towards the south, a moiety of the wood of 
Wodecroft towards the west, a moiety of the wood of La Hille towards 
the east, and free common in the rush land (junchetum) next to the 
said chapel towards the west, one yard to the east of the said chapel, 
and besides, twenty shillings of rent in Parva Winlesor out of lands 
held by Meriettus Niger, Alwin son of Henry, Ranulph Braciator, 
Roger Bercarius, Ralph Faber, Robert Long, Walter Cole, Carsanta 
daughter of William and Robert Claud. To have and to hold to 
Agnes during her life from the Abbot and his successors and the con- 



1 6 Dorset Fines, 



vent of Ford, doing the foreign service which belongs to that land for 
all service. After the death of Agnes the aforesaid carucate of land 
shall revert to the Abbot and his successors and his church of Ford 
quit of Agnes and her heirs for ever. 

(47) At Notingham, in the octave of All Saints, between Cristiana 
daughter of Roger de Waie, plaintiff, by Jordan son of Clement in her 
place, and Hugh de Waie her uncle, tenent, by Robert de Mantebi in 
his place, of two hides of land in Waie, one hide and a half in Winter- 
burne in which Hugh has no right being a bastard as the plaintiff. 
Hugh acknowledged the land to be the right of Cristiana, namely in 
demesnes and services of free men, in rents and villenages and all 
things pertaining wherever they may be. For this Cristiana gave 
and granted to Hugh and Matillida his wife, and the heirs she may 
have by Hugh, the one hide and a half in Winterburn as they lie 
within the metes and bounds of Winterburn, she retaining for herself 
and her heirs all the appurtenances to the said land outside the bounds 
of Winterburn. To have and to hold to Hugh and Matillida and 
her heirs by Hugh from Cristiana and her heirs by the service of a 
fourth part of a knight's fee for all service, so that the survivor of Hugh 
and Matillida and her heirs may have and hold the said hide and a 
half in Winterburn in peace from Cristiana and her heirs by the service 
of a fourth part of a knight's fee for all service. And if the heirs die 
without heirs of their bodies the land so granted shall return to 
Cristiana and her heirs quit. And all the land in Waie and the 
appurtenances outside the bounds of Winterburn shall remain to 
Cristiana and her heirs quit from Hugh and his heirs for ever, saving, 
however, to the Friars of the hospital of Jerusalem a rent of forty 
shillings yearly from one hide of land in Waie which Hugh formerly 
granted and gave to them out of the land in Waie and which they had 
granted to Cristiana and her heirs to hold from them and their succes- 
sors by the service of forty shillings by the year for all service. 

(48) At Canterbury in the octave of St. Michael, between Cristiana, 
daughter of Roger de Waie, plaintiff, and Hugh de Stokes, tenent, of 
three virgates of land in Evedon. Recognizance of mort ancestor was 
summoned between them. Cristiana remitted and quit claimed for 
herself and her heirs all her right and claim in the land to Hugh and 
his heirs for ever. For this Hugh gave to Cristiana forty shillings 
sterling. 

13 John (1211-12). 

(49) At Winton on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Ingelramus Cocus and Letitia his wife and Margeria her sister, plaintiffs, 
by Robert the clerk in their place, and Theobald de Pidele and Letitia 
his wife, tenents^ by Theobald himself in his wife's place, of three hides 



\^ John (1213-14). 17 



of land in Pidele. Recognizance of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. The tenents acknowledged the land to be the right of 
Letitia wife of Ingelramus, and Margeria her sister. For this Ingel- 
ramus, Letitia and Margeria granted to the tenents a third part of the 
land, namely a third part of the west field towards the south, with 
the yards and crofts which are in the same field towards the south 
of the little garden and a third part of the east field towards the south, 
and a third part of one virgate of land which lies, towards the north of 
the big garden, namely, that third part which is towards the south, and 
a third part of the mill, wood and pasture which belong to that land, 
and further one acre of meadow above Froma at the south part. To have 
and to hold to Theobald and Letitia for Letitia*s life by name of dower, 
as by gift of John de Pidele, formerly the husband of the said Letitia, 
father of Letitia and Margeria, from Ingelramus and Letitia and Mar- 
geria and the heirs of Letitia and Margeria, by the service which belongs 
to the third part of the whole of the land. And after the death of 
Letitia the whole of the aforesaid third part shall revert to Ingelramus 
and Letitia and Margeria and to the heirs of Letitia and Margeria quit, 
for ever. 

15 John (1213-14). 

(50) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter, between Maria, who 
was the wife of Robert, son of Herbert, plaintiff; and William, son of 
Robert, tenent, of a third part of one virgate of land in Alfeston and a third 
part ofone virgate of land in Stapelbrigg which Maria claims in dower as 
by the gift of the aforesaid Robert, formerly her husband. Maria remitted 
and quit claimed to William and his heiBs all her right and claim in the said 
third parts. For this William gave to Maria twenty shillings sterling. 

(51) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas, between Walter 
de Wudiete, plaintiff, by William his son in his place, and Robert de 
Rosele, tenent, of a moiety of three hides of land in Lim and in 
Huneton, which moiety Walter claimed as his share of the inheritance 
of Robert de Rosell, his uncle, and uncle of Nicolas, father of the said 
Robert. Walter remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to 
Robert and his heirs all his right and claim in the land, for ever. For 
this Robert gave Walter one hundred shillings sterling. 

John (uncertain year). 
(46) At Wigom, Wednesday next after the Assumption of the 
Blessed Mary, between Ysolda de Ferariis, plaintiff, and Ralph de 
Bruer and Muriel his wife, tenents, of the service of one knight's fee in 
Pidele and one third part of a knight's fee in Winterburn which the 
plaintiff claims in dower as of the freehold which was of Richard, son 
of Hathebrond, formerly her husband, in the same vill, and in dower 

2 



i8 Dorset Fines. 



which she claims against the said Ralph and Muriel, as by gift from 
Warin son of William, her second husband, in . . . Ysolda re- 
mitted and quit claimed for herself to Ralph and Muriel all her right 
and claim in one knight's fee in Pidele and one third part of a knight's 
fee in Winterburn, and in the dower which she claimed against Ralph 
and Muriel by gift of her second husband, for ever. For this the tenents 
granted to Ysolda the fee of one knight and a half in Bradeford to hold 
by name of dower for life, except one and a half virgate which remains 
to Walter de Ferleg and his heirs, to hold from Ralph and Muriel and 
their heirs by the service which belongs to that land. Moreover the 
tenents or their heirs ought to give to Ysolda twenty shillings yearly, 
namely, at four terms five shillings. Ralph and Muriel and their heirs 
will warrant to Ysolda for her life the twenty shillings as her dower and 
the said knights' fee and a half in Bradeford, except the said one 
virgate and a half, against all men. 

DIVERS COUNTIES. 

2 John (1200-01). 

SOMERSET AND DORSET. 

(17) At Westminster, fifteen days after Hillary, between Stephen 
Tirell, plaintiff, and Herbert, Bishop of Salisbury, tenent, by Ralph de 
Winesham in the Bishop's place, of the whole manor of Cerdestoke 
(co. Dorset) and five hides of land in Childecumton (co. Somerset). 
Stephen remitted and quit claimed all his right and claim in the same 
to the Bishop and his successors for ever. For this the Bishop gave 
and granted to Stephen and his heirs one hide of land in Cerdestoke 
called Mulnehale, to hold from the Bishop and his successors for ever 
by the service of half a knight, for all service. 

9 John (1207-08). 
SOMERSET AND DORSET. 
(47) At Geldeford, fifteen days after Hillary, between Robert de 
Monasterio and Matilda his wife, plaintiffs, by Robert himself in his 
wife's place, and William Walensis and Emma his wife, tenents, by 
William himself in his wife's place, of one third part of the vill of 
Waie (co. Dorset), and of Newenton, and of Sideliz, which third part 
Robert and Matilda claim as the dower of Matilda in the said vills by 
gift from Ralph son of Ruand formerly her husband. The tenents 
acknowledged the third part of the said vills to be the dower of Matilda. 
For this Robert and Matilda granted to the tenents the said third part 
of the vills. To hold to William and Emma and the heirs of Emma. 



2 Henry III, (1217-18). 19 

Rendering therefore yearly to Robert and Matilda during Matilda's 
life thirty shillings sterling at four terms of the year seven shillings 
and six pence. After the death of Matilda, William and Emma and 
the heirs of Emma shall be quit of the said rent for ever. 



2 Henry III. (1217-18). 

(i) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas, between Ralph 
de Bruer and Muriel his wife, complainants, by Ralph himself in 
Muriel's place, and Philip, Abbot of Shireburn, deforciant, of six and 
a half hides of land in Bradeford, whereof Ralph and Muriel complain 
that the Abbot entered into the land against a fine made by chirograph 
in the reign of King John between them and William the Abbot, pre- 
decessor of Philip. The complainants acknowledge the land to be the 
right of the Abbot and his church of St. Mary of Shireburn, and re- 
mitted and quit claimed, for themselves and the heirs of Muriel, the same 
land to the Abbot and his successors and his church aforesaid for ever. 
For this the Abbot gave to Ralph and Muriel thirty marcs of silver. 
Moreover, at the instance and request of Ralph and Muriel he granted 
to Walter de Bradeford, who Ralph and Muriel enfeoffed of one virgate 
and a half of land out of the same land, that he, Walter and his heirs, 
may have and hold the said virgate and a half from the Abbot and his 
successors by the free service of one pound of pepper to be rendered at 
Christmas for all service. The chirograph before made between Ralph 
and Muriel and the former Abbot is void on account of this present 
fine. 

(2) At Westminster, on the octave of St. Michael, between Henry 
Biscop and Hillaria his wife, plaintiffs, by the said Henry in Hillaria's 
place, and Henry de Meleburn, tenent, of one virgate of land in 
Meleburn which Henry and Hillaria claim to be the dower of Hillaria as 
of the freehold which was of Turstan deWarham, formerly her husband, 
in the same vill. Henry de Meleburn acknowledged the land to be the 
dower of Hillaria. For this Henry and Hillaria granted it to the tenent, 
to hold to himself and his heirs during Hillaria's life, by the free service 
of five shillings yearly, to be rendered at four terms fifteen pence, for all 
service. 

(3) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 
Robert de Wermewell, plaintiff, and Adam, Prior of Holm, deforciant, 
of the advowson of the church of Wermewelle. Assize of last presenta- 
tion was summoned between them. The Prior acknowledged the 
advowson to be the right of Robert, and remitted and quit claimed the 
same to him and his heirs for ever, from himself and his successors, 



20 Dorset Fines. 



saving to the Prior and his successors the ancient pension he was ac- 
customed to take from the same church. For this Robert gave and 
granted to the Prior one virgate of land in Riston, namely, whatever he 
had in that vill without any retainment. To have and to hold to the 
Prior and his successors and his house of Holm for ever from Robert 
and his heirs, by the free service of two shillings yearly, to be rendered 
at two terms twelve pence, namely, at Easter and Michaelmas, for all, 
save foreign, service. 

3 Henry III. (1218-19). 

(4) At Sirebum, Sunday next after the octave of St. Andrew the 
Apostle, between Hamo^ son of Richard, plaintiff, and Hugh Poinz, 
tenent, of two carucates of land in Sutton. Hugh acknowledged the 
same to be the right of Hamo. For this Hamo granted it to Hugh, to 
have and to hold to Hugh and his heirs from Hamo and his heirs for 
ten pounds, to be rendered yearly at the Abbey of Ceme to Hamo and 
his heirs or their attorney at two terms, namely, half at Easter, and 
half at Michaelmas next. For this Hugh gave to Hamo twenty marcs 
of silver, and will acquit the land against the chief lords for foreign 
service. If Hugh or his heirs do not observe the aforesaid terms it 
shall be lawful for Hamo and his heirs to take that land and other 
land, with the issues therefrom which Hugh has in that vill, into his 
hands and to hold it until he shall be satisfied of the arrears. This 
concord was made in the presence of Margeiy de Boun, mother of 
Hamo who agreed to it. 

(5) At Sireborn, Saturday next after the octave of St. Andrew the 
Apostle, between Henry de Percy, plaintiff, and Roger de Winesham, 
tenent, of six and a half virgates of land in Corteleg. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Henry acknowledged the land 
to be the right of Roger. For this Roger gave to Henry half a virgate 
of the said land, namely those ten acres which lie in Motweie towards 
the east, those two acres which lie in Sumerweie and Ortbire, those 
four acres of his demesne which lie towards the east, near the road 
called Langebereshauede, which reaches towards Cumbe, and that 
ferling of land of Lamere which Geoffrey de Percy sold to Ralf de 
Winesham. To have and to hold to Henry and his heirs from Roger 
and his heirs by as much service yearly as belongs to half a virgate of 
land in the same vill of the same tenement, save foreign service. For 
this Henry remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs all his 
right and claim in the six (sic) virgates for ever. 

(6) At Ilvecr (Ivelcesfr), Monday next before Ash Wednesday, be- 
tween Thomas Anderbode, plaintiff, and Philip son of Mathew, tenent, 
of a fifth part of a knight's fee in Ristona. Assize of mort ancestor 



3 Henry III, (1218-19). 21 

was summoned between them. Thomas remitted and quit claimed 
for himself and his heirs, to Philip and his heirs, all his right and 
claim in the said fifth part for ever. For this Philip gave to Thomas 
three marcs of silver. 

(7) At Sireborn, Tuesday next after the feast of St. Nicholas, be- 
tween Peter son of Walter, plaintiff, and Simon de Pilesdon, tenent, 
of half a hide of land in Deplepol. Assize of mort ancestor was sum- 
moned between them. Simon acknowledged the land to be the right 
of Peter, to hold to Peter and his heirs from Simon and his heirs, for 
ever. For this Peter granted to Simon and his heirs, for himself and 
his heirs, four shillings yearly from the said land, to be rendered at 
four terms, one shilling, doing therefor as much foreign service as 
belongs to half a hide of land in the same vill. Simon rendered to 
Peter the charter of Walter father of Peter, which he had. 

(8) At Westminster, fifteen days after Trinity, between Robert 
de Chantemerl, plaintiff, and Eustace Abbot of Middelton, deforciant, 
by Ralph de Henecumb his monk, in the Abbot's place, of the 
advowson of the church of Dalwude, whereof the Abbot said it was 
a chapel belonging to his mother church of Stocland. Robert remitted 
and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to the Abbot and his suc- 
cessors and the church of St. Sampson of Middelton for ever all his 
right and claim in the advowson aforesaid. The Abbot and his con- 
vent received Robert and his heirs into all orisons and alms in his 
church of Middelton for ever. 

(9) At Sireburn, on the second day before the feast of St. Thomas 
the Apostle, between Walter le Bugle and Margery his wife, by Walter 
himself in Margery's place, plaintiffs, and Letitia sister of Margery, 
tenent, of a rent of eight shillings in the vill of St. Eadward, which 
Margery claims as her part of the inheritance of Robert the clerk, 
uncle of Margery and Letitia. Walter and Margery remitted and quit 
claimed for themselves and their heirs to Letitia and her heirs, their 
right and claim in the said rent. For this Letitia granted to Margery 
and her heirs a house in the same vill, namely, towards the west near 
the door of Letitia's house and ten feet of improved {de incremento) 
ground towards the east of the said house and twenty two pence of 
yearly rent, to be rendered at two terms, namely, Michaelmas eleven 
pence and Easter eleven pence. To have and to hold to Margery 
and her heirs from Letitia and her heirs for ever free and quit of all, 
save foreign, service. 

(10) At Sireburn, on the vigil of St Thomas the Apostle, between 
Walter de Stokes, plaintiff, and Adam Dacun, tenent, of two virgates 
of land in Wrockeshal. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned be- 
tween them. Walter acknowledged the land to be the right of Adam. 



52 Dorset Fines, 



For this Adam gave and granted to Walter one and a half virgate of 
land, part of the above, to have and to hold to Walter and his heirs 
from Adam and his heirs for ever, by such service as belongs to such 
quantity of land in the same vill. 

(ii) At Sireburn, Friday next after the feast of St. Luke, between 
Mathew de Duninton, plaintiff, and Richard Camerarius, tenent, of 
three messuages in the vill of St. Eadword. Richard acknowledged 
the same to be the right of Mathew. For this Mathew granted the 
messuages to Richard, to hold to him and his heirs from Mathew and 
his heirs for ever, by the service of twelve pence and half a pound of 
frankincense for all service yearly, to be rendered at Michaelmas. For 
this Richard gave Mathew ten shillings sterling. 

(12) At luelcestre, Monday next before Ash Wednesday, between 
Richard son of Robert, plaintiff, and Warin son of Roger, tenent, of 
one virgate of land in Longcherchel. Assize of mort ancestor was 
summoned between them. Warin acknowledged the land to be the 
right of Richard, and for himself and his heirs rendered and quit 
claimed it to Richard and his heirs for ever. For this Richard gave 
to Warin ten shillings sterling. 

(13) At Sireburn, Tuesday next after the feast of St. Andrew the 
Apostle, between Emma de Gatemore, plaintiff, and Richard de 
Sifrewast, tenent, of the dower of Emma as of the freehold of Mathew 
de Gatemore formerly her husband, in Gattemore and Selnamton. 
Emma remitted and quit claimed for herself all her right in the afore- 
said dower. For this Richard gave to Emma twelve marcs of silver. 

(14) At Sireborn, Tuesday next after the feast of St. Andrew the 
Apostle, between Susan who was the wife of William son of Ranulf, 
plaintiff, and the Abbot of Bynedon, tenent, by Brother Thomas in the 
Abbot's place, of the dower of Susan as of the freehold of her late 
husband William in Chanedon. Susan remitted and quit claimed all her 
right and claim in the dower to the Abbot and the convent of Binedon. 
For this the Abbot and convent gave to Susan half a marc of silver. 

(15) At Sireborn, Tuesday next after the feast of St. Andrew the 
Apostle, between Walter de Percy, plaintiff, and Hamo de Percy, 
tenent, of two virgates of land in Uppecerne. Assize of mort ancestor 
was summoned between them. Hamo acknowledged the land to be 
the right of Walter. For this Walter granted it to Hamo, to hold to 
him and his heirs to farm from Walter and his heirs, during his life 
for one marc of silver yearly. To be rendered at four terms forty 
pence. If Hamo or his heirs do not observe those terms, it shall be 
lawful for Walter to take the land into his hand, and after Walter's 
death all the said land shall remain quit to Hamo and his heirs from 
the heirs of Walter for ever. 



3 Henry III, (1218-19). 23 

(16) At Sireborn, Tuesday next before the feast of St. Thomas the 
Apostle, between Symon de Percy, plaintiffs, and Symon de Pyllesdon, 
tenent, of one hide of land in Langeford. Assize of mort ancestor 
was summoned between them. The tenent acknowledged the land to 
be the right of Symon de Percy, and rendered the land to him, to hold 
to Simon de Percy and his heirs from the tenent and his heirs by the 
service of one pound of cumin yearly for all service, to be paid at 
Christmas. And to do foreign service of the fifth part of a knight's 
fee. For this Symon de Percy gave to Symon de Pillesdon one 
hundred shillings sterling. 

(17) At Ilvecr (Ivelcesir) (no date given) between Walter de 
Blakemor and Avicia his wife, plaintiffs, and Mathew de St. Eadword, 
tenent, of one messuage in the vill of St. Eadword which Avicia claims 
in dower as of the freehold of Laurence formerly her husband, in that 
vill. Avicia remitted and quit claimed for herself to Mathew and his 
heirs all her right and claim in the said dower. For this Mathew 
gave to Avicia one marc of silver. 

(18) At Sireborn, Saturday next after the feast of St Andrew the 
Apostle, between Roger son of Paganus, plaintiff, and Dionisius, Abbot 
of Cerne, tenent, of the manor of Netlecumbe. Assize of mort ancestor 
was summoned between them. Roger remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs to the Abbot and convent of Cerne for ever, all 
his right and claim in the aforesaid manor. For this the Abbot and 
convent of Cerne gave to Roger one hundred shillings sterling. 

Robert de Neweburgh puts in his claim to the manor. 

(19) At Yvecestre, Tuesday next before the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between William son of Hervey, plaintiff, and Ralph 
Belet, tenent, of half a virgate of land in Stepelton. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. William acknowledged the 
land to be the right of Ralph. For this Ralph gave William three 
shillings sterling. 

(20) At Sireborn, on St. Nicholas' day, between Richard le 
Sarmoner and Letitia his wife, by Richard himself in Letitia's place, 
plaintiffs, and William de Guisey and Avicia his wife, by William 
himself in Avicia's place, tenents, of one messuage in Saftebir. William 
and Avicia acknowledged the messuage to be the right of Letitia and 
remitted and quit claimed, for themselves and their heirs, the same to 
Richard and Letitia and their heirs for ever. For this Richard and 
Letitia gave to William and Avicia ten shillings sterling. 

(21) At Sireburn, on the vigil of St. Thomas the Apostle, between 
Walter de Stokes, plaintiff, and Robert de Hauekescherch, tenent, of 
one virgate of land in Wrokeshal. Assize of mort ancestor was 



24 Dorset Fines. 



summoned between them. Robert acknowledged the land to be the 
right of Walter. For this Walter granted it to Robert, to hold to him 
and his heirs from Walter and his heirs for ever by as much foreign 
service as belongs to one virgate of land, for all service. Walter took 
the homage of Robert at the court. 

(22) At Exeter, on the octave of St Gregory, between Avicia who 
was the wife of William de Clift, plaintiff, and John, Abbot of Donekes- 
well, tenent, of three and a half hides of land in Loderford and in 
Ucresdon which Avicia claims in dower as of the freehold of William 
formerly her husband. The Abbot called to warrant Roger, Abbot of 
Ford who came and warranted. Avicia remitted and quit claimed for 
herself to the Abbot of Donekeswell and his successors for ever, all 
her right and claim in the land by name of dower. For this the Abbot 
of Forde gave to Avicia one hundred shillings sterling. 

(23) At Ivelcestre, Wednesday next after the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Alice, who was the wife of Robert son of 
Acelinus, plaintiff, and Thomas de Kaneford, tenent, of one hide of 
land in Strafford whom Thomas de Winterburn called to warrant 
therein and who warranted him, which land Alice claims in dower as 
of the freehold of Robert formerly her husband in Buretun. Thomas 
de Kanesford acknowledged and rendered to Alice all the land, to hold 
from him and his heirs during her life by name of dower, to her. For 
this Alice gave to Thomas de Kaneford two marcs of silver. 

(24) At Ivelcestre, Monday next before Ash Wednesday, between 
Thomas Anderbod, plaintiff, and Odo, tenent, of the eleventh part of 
a knight's fee in Brunescumb. Thomas remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs to Odo and his heirs, all his right and claim in 
the said eleventh part for ever. For this Odo gave to Thomas half a 
marc of silver. 

(25) At Ivelcestre, 'Monday next before Ash Wednesday, between 
William son of Gerard and Matilda his wife, plaintiffs, and Peter de 
Aunevill, tenent, of two and a half hides of land in Langeton, and one 
hide in Litlebridie. Peter acknowledged the land to be the right of 
William and Matilda. For this they gave and granted to Peter one 
hide of land in Langeton called Chercheshid which lies in front of the * 
monastery of Langeton towards the south, with messuages in the west 
part of the monastery which belong to William and Matilda in the 
same vill and all that part of the wood from the lake towards the west 
which Robert de Anevill held. To have and to hold from William 
and Matilda and their heirs to Peter and his heirs for ever by the free 
service of half a pound of cumin yearly, to be rendered at Michaelmas 
for all, save foreign, service, as much as belongs to one hide of land 
in that vill. 



7 Henry III. (1222-23). 25 

7 Henry III. (1222-23). 

(26) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 
Avenellus son of Robert, plaintiff, and Henry, Abbot of Becco 
Herlewin, tenent, by William de Waneting in the Abbots' place, of 
the manor of Puninton. A duel in arms was waged and fought be- 
tween them in the Court. Avenellus remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs to the Abbot and his successors and his church 
of Becco Herlewin for ever, all his right and claim in the manor. For 
this the Abbot gave to Avenellus thirty marcs of silver. 

(27) At Westminster, on the octave of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Philip, Abbot of Schirebum, plaintiff, by 
Walter de Bradeford in the Abbot's place, and Arnold Vitulus and 
Amicia his wife, tenents, by Arnold himself in Amicia's place, of half a 
hide of land in Bradeford. The tenents acknowledged the land to be 
the right of the Abbot and his church of Schireburn, and remitted and 
quit claimed the same for themselves and the heirs of Amicia to the 
Abbot and his successors and his church for ever. For this the Abbot 
gave to Arnold and Amicia one hundred shillings sterling. 

(28) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 
Bartholomew Clodhamer, plaintiff, and Nicholas de Punsot, tenent, of the 
manor of Mapeldre. Bartholomew remitted and quit claimed for himself 
and his heirs all his right and claim therein to Nicholas and his heirs 
for ever. For this Nicholas gave to Bartholomew ten marcs of silver. 

(29) At Westminster, in the morrow of All Saints, between Robert 
de Tolre, plaintiff, and Roger, Abbot of Ford, tenent, of half a knight's 
fee and three virgates of land in Tolre. Robert remitted and quit 
claimed for himself and his heirs all his right and claim in the said 
half knight's fee and three virgates to the Abbot and his successors and 
his church of Ford for ever. For this the Abbot granted that every 
year he and his successors will give to Robert during his life two 
marcs of silver at Ford, at two terms, namely^ at Easter one marc, 
and at Michaelmas one marc, and if they do not make the payments 
at those terms, Robert may distrain the Abbot and his successors for 
their chattels found upon that land until payment be made of the 
aforesaid two marcs. After Robert's death the Abbot and his succes- 
sors shall be quit for ever of the payment. Moreover, the Abbot gave 
to Robert twenty-five marcs of silver. This concord was made with 
the assent and wish of Cecilia, mother of Robert, who was present, 
and who held a third part of the said half knight's fee and of the said 
three virgates of land in dower. Cecilia granted the third part to the 
Abbot and his successors to hold from her during her life rendering 
therefor yearly thirty shillings at the aforesaid terms. 



26 Dorset Fines, 



8 Henry III. (1223-24). 

(30) At Westminster, on the morrow of All Saints, between Henry 
de Cerne, complainant, and John de Abecot and Margery his wife, im- 
pedients, of a moiety of the manor of Melecumb. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned between them. John and Margery acknowledged 
and granted the moiety to be the right of Henry as that which he had 
by their gift, namely, in demesnes and rents, in villenage, homage and 
services of free men, in woods, meadows and pastures and in all other 
things to the said moiety of the manor pertaining. To have and to 
hold from John and Margery and the heirs of Margery to Henry and 
his heirs or his assigns for ever. Rendering therefor yearly one 
hundred shillings at Melecumb at two terms, namely, one moiety at 
Easter and the other moiety at Michaelmas for all service, custom and 
demand. John and Margery and the heirs of Margery will warrant the 
moiety of the manor to Henry and his heirs or assigns against all 
people. For this Henry gave to John and Margery one hundred 
shillings sterling. 

9 Henry III. (1224-25). 

(31) At^ , on the morrow of ^ , between Amicia, Countess 
of Clare, plaintiff, by Hugh de Bodekesham in her place, and Hugh 
de Gundevill tenent of two parts of a knight's fee in Pimpre, and 
between the said Countess by the said Hugh de Bodekesham and the 
said Hugh de Gundevill who Agatha his mother called to warrant of 
her dower in a third part of a knight's fee in the same vill, which third 
part the Countess claimed against Agatha and which Hugh warranted to 
her. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Hugh 
acknowledged the whole of the one knight's fee to be the right of the 
Countess and rendered and quit claimed it for himself and his heirs to 
the Countess and her heirs for ever. Saving to Benedict de Here and 
his heirs one hide of land of the said knight's fee which formerly he 
had by the gift of Hugh in Nutford which is a member of Pimpre, to 
hold to them from the Countess and her heirs by the same service 
which he was accustomed to do therefor to Hugh. For this Gilbert de 
Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, son and heir of the Countess 
gave and granted to Hugh one hundred shillings of land in Opton 
namely all the land which Geoffrey de Heldelond held in the same vill 
from the Earl, to have and to hold to Hugh and his heirs from the 
Earl and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the service of one fourth 
part of a knight's fee for all service. And Agatha by her attorney 
acknowledged that Hugh has satisfied her concerning the exchange of 
the aforesaid one third part. 

^ Part of document torn off containing place and date. 



9 Henry III. (1224-25). 27 



[Note.  The last paragraph is likewise endorsed on the fine with 
** Hamelin her son " as the name of her attorney.] 

(32) At Westminster, in the octave of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Master Henry de Cerne, complainant, and Henry 
Toneire, deforciant, by Philip de Langeham in his place, of common 
of pasture in Melecumbe, whereof Master Henry de Cerne complains 
that Henry Toneire unjustly occupied that pasture, inasmuch as he 
himself had no common in the pasture of Henry Toneire in Erminge- 
well, neither did Henry de Toneire do service to him for the common 
he ought to have in the pasture of Melecumb. Henry Toneire ac- 
knowledged the whole of the pasture of Melecumb to be the right of 
Henry de Cerne and remitted and quit claimed the same for himself 
and his heirs to Henry de Cerne and his heirs for ever. For this 
Henry de Cerne gave to Henry Toneire forty shillings sterling. 

(33) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Philip, Abbot of Schireburn, plaintiff, and 
Muriel de Caundel, tenent, of half a hide of land in Bradeford. Muriel 
acknowledged the land to be the right of the Abbot and remitted and 
quit claimed it for herself and her heirs to the Abbot and his successors 
and his church of Schireburn for ever. For this the Abbot gave to 
Muriel four marcs of silver. 

(34) At Westminster, on the octave of St. Hillary, between 
William, Master of the house of God of Suthamton, complainant, and 
Philip, Abbot of Schireborne, deforciant, by Walter de Heydon in the 
Abbot's place, of services and customs which Master William demands 
from the Abbot in respect of three virgates of land in Brochamton, 
which the Abbot does not acknowledge to him. Master William ac- 
knowledged the said land to be the right of the Abbot and his church 
of Schireburn, to have and to hold to the Abbot and his successors from 
the said Master William and his successors and the other friars of 
the said house of God for ever. Rendering therefor yearly thirteen 
shillings, at four terms three shillings and three pence, for all service 
and demand. For this the Abbot gave to Master William twenty 
shillings sterling. 

(35) At Westminster, in the octave of St. Hillary, between Roger, 
Prior of Holy Trinity of Twineham, plaintiff, by John de Winton in his 
place, and Symon de Pilesdon, tenent, of one hide of land in Lange- 
ford. Recognizance of the great assize was summoned between them. 
The Prior remitted and quit claimed for himself and his successors all 
his right and claim in the land, to Symon and his heirs for ever. 
For this Symon gave and granted to the Prior one hide of land in the 
Isle of Wicht, namely all that land called Wilmmgeham. To have and 
to hold to the Prior and his successors from Symon and his heirs for 



28 Dorset Fines. 



ever, doing therefor as much foreign service as belongs to such land, 
for all service. For this the Prior gave and granted to Symon three 
and a half virgates of land in Atrom namely all that land which the 
Prior had in the same vill, and the homage and whole service of John 
de Killing and his heirs respecting one mill in Briddeport, namely ten 
shillings yearly and foreign service, and the homage and whole service 
of Hugh de Strod and his heirs respecting half a virgate of land in 
Bitelak, namely two shillings yearly and foreign service. To have and 
to hold to Symon and his heirs from the Prior and his successors, 
doing thereior foreign service, and rendering therefor yearly four 
shillings at two terms of the year, namely one moiety at Easter and 
the other moiety at Michaelmas, for all service. This concord was 
made^ there being present John de Killing and Hugh de Strod who ac- 
knowledged that they owed the aforesaid services. 

(36) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Apostles Simon and 
Jude, between Roger Prior of Holy Trinity de Twinham, plaintiff, by 
John de Winton in his place, and Hugh de Thurbervill, tenent, of 
two hides and one virgate and a half of land in Prestepidel. Recog- 
nizance of the great assize was summoned between them. The Prior 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his successors all his right 
and claim in the land, to Hugh and his heirs for ever. For this Hugh 
gave and granted to the Prior half a virgate of land in Windesteort 
which Henry de Pidel held. To have and to hold to the Prior and his 
successors and his church of Twynham from Hugh and his heirs for 
ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of gloves or one penny at 
Easter for all, save foreign, service. 

(37) At Wilton, on the morrow of St. Michael, between Martin de 
Paterhill, Dean of Winburn, plaintiff, and Simon de Walteford, tenent, 
whom Walter Jordan and Alice his wife called to warrant and who 
warranted them, of twenty four acres of land in Kingeston. Simon 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Martin and his church of 
Winburn, and remitted and quit claimed the same for himself and his 
heirs to Martin and his successors and his church of Winburn for ever. 
And Walter and Alice remitted and quit claimed the warranty of the 
said land for themselves and the heirs of Alice to Simon and his heirs 
for ever. For this Martin gave to Simon, Walter, and Alice two 
marcs of silver. Be it known that the charter which Walter and Alice 
had respecting the twenty four acres is annulled by this fine, because 
Walter and Alice together remitted and quit claimed for themselves 
and the heirs of Alice to the said Martin and his successors and the 
church aforesaid, all the right and claim which they had or could 
have in the land aforesaid for ever. 

(38) At Wilton, on the morrow of St. Michael, between Philip de 



lo Henry III. (1225-26). 29 

Blakemore, plaintiff, and Robert Belet, tenent, whom Ralph Belet, 
Alexander de Staford and Mabel his wife called to warrant, by 
Alexander in Mabel's place, and who warranted them of one hide of 
land in Winterburn. And between the said Philip, plaintiff and the 
said Robert, tenent, of five shillings of rent in Brochamton. Recog- 
nizance of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Robert 
acknowledged the said five shillings of rent to be the right of Philip. 
Moreover he acknowledged twenty shillings of rent which Philip 
formerly held from him in the vill of Witonia (? Wilton or Winton) 
to be the right of Philip. To have and to hold to Philip and his heirs 
from Robert and his heirs together with the five shillings of rent in 
Brochampton. Rendering therefor yearly for the said twenty shillings 
of rent certain gilt spurs or six pence and for the five shillings of rent 
one pound of cumin at Michaelmas for all service and demand. 
Moreover Robert gave to Philip six marcs of silver. For this Philip 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Robert, Ralph, 
Alexander, and Mabel and their heirs, all the right and claim he had 
or could have in the aforesaid hide of land in Winterburn for ever. 

10 Henry III. (1225-26). 

(39) At 1 . . , between Roger de  cy . . . , and Margaret 

of common of pasture in Winburneholt, wherein John and 

Margaret complain that Roger unjustly demands . . against them 
inasmuch as they had not common in the land of Roger, nor did he do 
to them service in respect of the common he had. John and Margaret 
to Roger common of pasture for the whole of Winburne- 
holt for all his own cattle and those of his men of Hineton Martel 
quit of herbage ex in the aforesaid common. Like- 
wise they have granted to Roger and his heirs all the increment of their 

own pigs and those of the aforesaid of pannage. To 

have and to hold to Roger and his heirs from John and Margaret and the 

heirs of Margaret for ever to John and Margaret and 

the heirs of Margaret six shillings at Martinmas for all service. It 

shall be lawful to the same of Margaret to break up 

the ground and enclose within and outside the wood in the whole oi 
the aforesaid pasture whenever they wished without hindrance of Roger 

and his heirs If Roger or his heirs have not 

rendered the six shillings at the term aforesaid it shall be lawful for 

John and Margaret and the heirs of Margaret for 

their cattle found in the aforesaid common until full payment of the six 
shillings. For this Roger granted to the aforesaid ret 

^ Part of the document torn off. 



30 Dorset Fines, 



and the heirs of Margaret common of pasture for all their cattle on his 
heath of Hineton and those of their men of Kingestun and for the 
cattle of all the others who by the same John and Margaret and 
Margaret's heirs shall have entry in the same pasture . . . burne- 
holt. It shall be lawful for Roger and his heirs to break up the 
ground and enclose in the aforesaid heath of Hineton as much as they 
wish without hindrance from John and Margaret and the heirs of 
Margaret. Moreover Roger gave to John and Margaret eight marcs 
of silver. Be it known that Roger or his heirs can claim right for 
themselves in the chace of Winburneholt, except as to foxes, hares 
and wild cats ; the right was granted to him by John and Margaret. 

II Henry III. (1226-27). 

(40) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Annunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Roger son of Thurstan, plaintiff, and Henry Biscop and 
Eularia his wife, tenents, of one virgate of land in Werghrode. Assize 
of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Roger remitted and 
quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Henry and Eularia and the 
heirs of Eularia, all his right and claim in the said one virgate for 
ever. For this Henry and Eularia gave to Roger five marcs of silver. 

(41) At Dorcestre, on the octave of St. Gregory, between William 
son of William, plaintiff, and John son of Joan de la Bere, tenent, of 
one messuage in Wimburn. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. William remitted and quit claimed for himself and his 
heirs to John and his heirs, all his right and claim in the messuage, for 
ever. For this John gave to William half a marc of silver. 

(42) At Dorcestre, on the octave of St. Gregory, between John son 
of Simon de Litletun, plaintiff, and Ralph, Abbot of Dinnedun (s/c, 
for Binnedun) tenent, of the fourth part of a knight's fee in Hechfeltun. 
John remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to the Abbot 
and his successors, and his church of Binnedun for ever, all his right 
and claim in the said fourth part. For this the Abbot gave to John 
one marc of silver. 

(43) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the octave of St. Gregory, 
between Isabella, Alvina and Matilda daughters of William Cupping, 
plaintiffs, and Roger, Prior of Cristescherche, tenent, by John de Auna 
his canon, in the Prior's place, of one messuage in Warham. Assize 
of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Isabella, Alvina and 
Matilda remitted and quit claimed for themselves and their heirs to 
the Prior and his successors and his church of Cristescherche for ever, 
all their right and claim in the aforesaid messuage. For this the 
Prior gave to them three marcs of silver. 



II Henry III. (1226-27). 31 

(44) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Sampson de la Boxe, plaintiff, and Nicholas de 
Chikerel, tenent, of one virgate of land in Chikerel. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Nicholas acknowledged the 
land to be the right of Sampson and rendered it to him. For this 
Sampson gave and granted to Nicholas half a virgate of the said land, 
namely that half virgate which Alured Golde held. To have and to 
hold to Nicholas and his heirs begotten of Beatrice, mother of Sampson. 
Rendering therefor yearly four pence at Michaelmas for all, save foreign, 
service. If such heirs should die without heirs then the land shall 
revert to Sampson and his heirs quit for ever. 

(45) At Dorecestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the 
Blessed Mary, between Richard Gol, plaintiff and Roger de St. Edward 
and Leticia his wife and Walter le Bugle and Margery his wife, tenents, 
by Roger himself in Leticia' s place, of one virgate of land in Pidele. 
Recognizance of the great assize was summoned between them. 
Roger and Leticia, Walter and Margery acknowledged the land to be 
the right of Richard, and rendered and quit claimed the same for them- 
selves and the heirs of Leticia and Margery to Richard and his heirs 
for ever. For this Richard gave to Roger and Leticia and Walter and 
Margery four marcs of silver. 

(46) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the octave of St. Gregory, 
between William Hareng, plaintiff, and Philip Hareng, tenent, of 
seven and a half virgates of land in Chaunedon. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Philip acknowledged the 
land to be the right of William and rendered it to him. For this 
William gave and granted to Philip a moiety of the land, namely three 
ac. in the east part of his court, and two and a half ac. in the west 
part, half an ac. in his garden towards the south, eleven ac. under 
Bremehull near the road of Chaunedon, four ac. in Cumba towards 
the west, three ac. above Hydiestansilie and nine ac. above Riecnap 
and Pittescumbe, sixteen ac. in Ruchedich and in Eltecumbe, ten ac. 
above ForteshuU towards the west, twelve ac. in Gratebergh towards 
the south, eight ac. in Eltecumbe towards the east, seventeen ac. 
between the boundaries of Wynefrod and Horeduneslan, three ac. in 
Brimecherche and Erlewinescroff, sixteen ac. between Cumbe and 
Whethull, eight ac. in Hangelond and Uplangelond, one ac. in 
Marlero, one perch and a half in La Bie, three and a half ac. in La 
Wurthe towards the north, one virgate which William son of Baldwin 
held, half a virgate which Ranulfus de Foresteshull held, half a virgate 
which Hamo Berde held, half a virgate which Roger son of Hamo 
held, half a virgate which Tericus the priest held, half a virgate which 
William Sinegone held, four ac. which Jordan Brakeshers held, half a 



32 Dorset Fines, 



virgate which Henry Juvenis held, four ac. which Albert de Chaunedon 
held, half a virgate which William Doget held, half a croft which 
Robert Child held, four ac. which Snoting held, four ac which Terricus 
Winebeld held, half a virgate which Nicholas the priest held ; and the 
homage and entire service of Hugh Pos and his heirs in half a virgate 
of land and half a mill, namely five shillings and four fatted beasts 
and foreign service ; the homage and entire service of John Harang 
and his heirs in half a virgate of land, namely half a pound of pepper 
for all, save foreign, service ; a moiety of the service of John de 
Craucumb and his heirs of the fourth part of one virgate of land, 
namely two shillings and six pence for all, sav foreign, service; a 
moiety of the entire service of Ralph, Abbot of Binedon and his suc- 
cessors of three and a half virgates of land, namely nine shillings and 
three pence, and one pound of pepper and one pound of cumin for all, 
save foreign, service; and the homage and entire service of Roger 
Heyrun and his heirs of half a virgate of land, namely half a pound of 
pepper for all, save foreign, service. Moreover William granted that 
after the decease of John Harang, who was parson of the church of the 
said vill on the day this concord was made, Philip and his heirs shall 
have the first presentation to that church, so that when their clerk, 
who at their presentation was admitted, should die, the said William or 
his heirs shall present another clerk without hindrance of Philip or 
his heirs, and when that clerk shall die, who at the presentation of 
William and his heirs was admitted, the said Philip or his heirs again 
shall present to the said church, and so alternately from clerk to clerk 
William and Philip and their heirs shall present for ever. William 
also granted to Philip all the land of Cerne which is called Haringeston 
and which was the marriage (portion) of Lucia, grandmother of 
William and mother of Philip, and also a moiety of the whole manor 
of Chandon as Philip formerly held the same. To have and to hold to 
Philip and his heirs from William and his heirs for ever together with 
villeins holding that villeinage and all their sequels. Rendering there- 
for yearly one pair of gloves at Easter for all, save foreign, service. 
Moreover William granted that whatever they could purchase of the 
inheritance of Richard Harang and Terricus Harang, their ancestors, 
in England and Wales they shall divide between them, each contribut- 
ing a moiety of the cost of such purchase. And both of them and their 
heirs shall have their own hayward in the vill of Chaundon whenever 
they wish. After the death of Lucia, all the land which she held in 
dower on the day this concord was made shall remain to Philip and 
his heirs, and likewise all the land which Agnes, mother of William 
held in dower on the day this concord was made, shall, after her death, 
remain to William and his heirs. This concord was made there being 



II Henry III, (1226-27). 33 

present Hugh Pos, John Harang, John de Craucumbe, Ralph, Abbot 
of Binedon and Roger Haynin acknowledging that they owe the afore- 
said services. 

(47) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Thomas de Abbendon, complainant, and Walter de 
Turbervill, deforciant, by William Mautravers in his place of common 
of pasture m Stoke, whereof Thomas complained that Walter unjustly 
demanded that common as Thomas had not common in the land of 
Walter at Melebir, nor did Walter do service to him because he ought 
to have the aforesaid common. Walter remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs all his right and claim in the aforesaid common of 
pasture to Thomas and his heirs for ever. For this Thomas gave 
to Walter half a marc of silver. 

(48) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary between Ela, Countess of Salisbury, plaintiff, by William de 
Erneford in her place, and Thomas de Kaneford, tenent, of fifty shillings 
of land in Kaneford and in Pola. Thomas acknowledged the .land to be 
the right of the Countess. For this the Countess granted it to Thomas, 
to have and to hold to Thomas for his life from the Countess and her 
heirs. Rendering therefor yearly two pounds of pepper and one pair 
of gilt spurs or sixpence for all service. After the death of Thomas two 
parts of the said land revert to the Countess and her heirs quit for ever 
and then the third part shall remain to Matilda the wife of Thomas to 
hold during her life in name of dower. 

(49) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Hugh, Abbot, of Abbotesbir, complainant, and Hugh 
son of William and Matilda his wife, deforciants, of common of pasture 
in Helton, namely in the whole marsh of Helton, whereof the Abbot 
complains that Hugh and Matilda unjustly demand common there inas- 
much as he has no common in their land of Maupodre nor do they do 
service to him because they ought to have that common. The Abbot 
acknowledged and granted to Hugh and Matilda common of pasture in 
the marsh for twenty beasts and fifty bidents (two year old sheep with 
two teeth) except in Hetherle and all the closes of Thorne where Hugh 
and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda shall have no common. To have 
and to hold to Hugh and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda from the 
Abbot and his successors and his church of Abbotesbir for ever. Render- 
ing therefor yearly two shillings, at four teritis six pence, for all service. 
The Abbot and his successors may break up and cultivate a certain 
part of the said marsh wherever they wish without hindrance from 
Hugh and Matilda or the heirs of Matilda saving to them common for 
twenty beasts and fifty bidents after the corn therefrom is carried away. 
For this Hugh and Matilda gave to the Abbot one marc of silver. 

3 



34 Dorset Fines. 



(50) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Emma, who was the wife of Theodor de Munfort, 
plaintiff, and William Ailward, tenent, of a third part of three messu- 
ages in Dorcestre, which Emma claimed in dower as of the freehold of 
Theodor formerly her husband, in the same vill. Emma remitted and 
quit claimed for herself to William and his heirs all her right and claim 
in the land in name of dower. For this William gave to Emma five 
shillings sterling. 

(51) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Ela, Countess of Salisbury, plaintiff by William de 
Erneford in her place, and Henry son of Warin, tenent, of thirty ac. of 
land, two ac. of meadow and five shillings of land in Kaneford. Henry 
acknowledged the whole to be the right of the Countess and rendered and 
quit claimed the same for himself and his heirs to the Countess and her 
heirs for ever, saving to Henry and his heirs the sowing of the whole 
of the land with corn this year until Michaelmas. 

(52) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Gilbert son of Robert, plaintiff, and Henry son of 
Warin, tenent, who Hugh de Gundevill and Isabella his wife called 
to warrant of half a hide and half a virgate of land in Sideling, which 
land Gilbert claimed against Hugh and Isabella, and which Henry 
warranted to them. Recognizance of the great assize was summoned 
between Gilbert and Henry. Henry acknowledged the land to be the 
right of Gilbert and rendered and quit claimed it for himself and his 
heirs to Gilbert and his heirs for ever. For this Gilbert gave to Henry 
seventeen marcs of silver. Be it known that Hugh and Isabella have 
remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of Isabella to 
Henry and his heirs the exchange of the said land for the said seven- 
teen marcs which Gilbert gave to Henry. 

(53) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Walter de Turbervill, plaintiff, by William Mautravers 
in his place, and Thomas de Abbendum, tenent, of one virgate of land 
in Stoke. Recognizance of the great assize was summoned between 
them. Walter remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to 
Thomas and his heirs for ever all his right and claim in the said land. 
For this Thomas gave to Walter half a marc of silver. 

(54) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Roger son of Turstan, plaintiff, and Henry Bissop 
and Eularia his wife, tenents, of one virgate of land in Werghrode. 
Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Henry and 
Eularia acknowledged the land to be the right of Roger and rendered 
it to him. For this Henry and Eularia gave to Roger five marcs of 
silver. 



II Henry III, (1226-27). 35 

(55) At Dorcester, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between William de Chambernun, plaintiff, and Roger, the Prior 
of Christchurch, tenent, by John de Auna, canon, in the Prior's place, 
of the fourth part of one knight's fee in Flete. Recognizance of the 
great assize was summoned between them. William acknowledged 
the same to be the right of the Prior and his church of Christchurch, 
to have and to hold to the Prior and his successors and his church 
of Christchurch from William and his heirs in free and perpetual alms, 
doing therefor the service of half a knight for all service. For this the 
Prior gave to William fifty five marcs of silver. Be it known that if 
William or his heirs henceforth produce a charter or muniment con- 
cerning the aforesaid land of Flute (sic) it shall be void so far as con- 
cerns the manor of Flute (sic), 

[Note.  The last paragraph is also endorsed on the document.] 

(56) At Wilton, three weeks after the Trinity, between Robert 
Fromund, complainant, and Benedict de Bere, impedient, of one hide 
of land in Nutford, and pasture for ten oxen and six cows with 
their belongings for three years, and one horse and three hundred 
sheep with their belongings for two years and ten pigs, quit of herbage 
and pannage in Nutford and in Pimpre. Benedict acknowledged the 
land and pasture with the appurtenances in all things to be the right 
of Robert. To have and to hold to Robert and his heirs from Benedict 
and his heirs for ever. Rendering therefor yearly two shillings at 
Easter, for all secular service, custom and demand to Benedict or his 
heirs belonging, save foreign service. Benedict and his heirs will 
warrant to Robert and his heirs for ever the said land and pasture by 
the service aforesaid against all men. For this Robert gave to 
Benedict fifty marcs of silver. 

(57) At Wilton, three weeks after Easter day, between John son of 
Robert, plaintiff, and John son of John Eskelling, tenent, of two 
carucates of land in Acford. John son of John acknowledged the same, 
as he held it on the day this fine was made, with the advowson of a 
moiety of the church of the same vill, in demesnes, rents, homages and 
services of free men, in villenage and in all other things, to be the right 
of John son of Robert, and rendered and quit claimed for himself and 
his heirs to John son of Robert and his heirs for ever all the land in 
Acford, saving to Cecilia mother of John son of John a third part of the 
whole of the said land, to hold during her life by name of dower as 
before she held it. After whose death the third part shall revert to 
John son of Robert and his heirs, quit, for ever. For this John son of 
Robert gave and granted to John son of John all the land he had in 
Kaerswurth which is member of, and belonging to, Acford, and all the 
land, with all its appurtenances in all things which he had in Cunkes 



36 Dorset Fines, 



in Wiltshire. To have and to hold to John son of John from John son 
of Robert and his heirs for ever. Doing for the land of Kaerswurth as 
much foreign service as belongs to that land, and for the land of Cunkes 
the service of half a knight for all service. After the decease of Alice 
Giffard who holds the manor of Nategrave in co. Gloucester in dower by 
gift of John Eskelling grandfather of John son of Robert, in manner 
hereafter mentioned that manor shall be divided between them or their 
heirs, that is to say : the advowson of a moiety of the church of the 
same manor and the chief court with a moiety of the same manor shall 
remain to John son of John and his heirs, to hold to them from John 
son of Robert and their heirs for ever by the service which, to that 
moiety, belongs. And a more suitable (competencius) messuage of the 
villenage of the same manor, excepting the chief court, and the other 
moiety of the same manor, shall remain to John son of Robert and his 
heirs. If John son of Robert and John son of John or the heirs of 
either by any cause were hindered in having the manor after the decease 
of Alice as is aforesaid, so that they were put to the cost of purchasing 
the same, each of them or their heirs should bear a moiety of such 
cost. This concord was made saving to Henry Marescall, Walter 
Bastard, Odo de Acford, Thomas le Breton and Reginald de Mohun 
and their heirs, their tenements which they had by gift of John son of 
John and of his father, in Acford ; and in like manner, whatever 
else they could acquire elsewhere in England or in Normandy of 
the inheritance which was of John Eskelling their grandfather, they 
shall divide between them, and each of them shall bear a moiety of the 
cost. 

(58) At Wilton, one month after Easter-day, between Simon son of 
Simon le Botiller, plaintiff, and Robert Belet, tenent, whom Gregory de Turr 
called to warrant, of half a hide of land in Sucre, which Simon claimed 
against Gregory and which land Robert warranted to Gregory. Simon 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Gregory and his 
heirs for ever all his right and claim in the said land. For this Gregory 
gave to Simon five marcs of silver. 

(59) At Wilton, Thursday next after Trinity, between Master Henry 
de Cerne, complainant, and Richard, Abbot of Cerne, deforciant, of one 
horse load (summagium) of wood in the wood of Middelmersh, whereof 
Henry claimed every week day one horseload of alder during the whole 
year. The abbot acknowledged and granted to Henry one horseload 
of alder for four days in the week during the whole year quit for ever. 
To have and to hold to Henry and his heirs from the abbot and his 
successors and his church of Cerne for ever. If Henry did not have 
the said horseloads in one week, the deficiency to be made up in the 
following week. 



II Henry III, (1226-27). 37 

(60) At Dorecestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the 
Blessed Mary, between Walter de Lroereny and Margery his wife, 
plaintiffs, by Peter de Loereny in their place, and Amicia, abbess of St. 
Edward, tenent, by William de Stawell in her place, of one hide and 
a half of land in Blackenewell. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. Walter and Margery remitted and quit claimed for 
themselves and the heirs of Margery to the abbess and her successors 
being abbesses, and her church of St. Edward, for ever, all their right 
and claim in the said land. For this the abbess gave to Walter and 
Margery four marcs of silver. 

(61) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Hawisia de Athelington, plaintiff, and William de 
Leghe, tenent, of sixty acres of land in Athelington. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Hawisia acknowledged the 
land to be the right of William. For this William gave and granted 
to Hawisia fifteen ac. and one messuage of the said land, namely, 
ten ac. and a messuage which John Wede held, three ac. in Langelande 
towards the south and two ac. between the garden of Willian de Leghe 
and Athelington mill towards the east. To have and to hold to 
Hawisia and her heirs from William and his heirs for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one pair of gloves or one penny at Easter for all, save 
foreign service. 

(62) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the octaves of St. Gregory, 
between Jordan Duket and Isabella his wife, plaintiffs, and Roger 
Farthayn, tenent, of four messuages in Ivelcestre. Roger remitted and 
quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Jordan and Isabella and the 
heirs of Isabella, for ever, all his right and claim therein. For this 
Jordan and Isabella gave to Roger thirty shillings sterling. 

(63) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Henry de Ortiaco and Sabina his wife, plaintiffs, by 
Henry le Sauvage in Sabina's place, and Roger de Heles, whom Jocelin 
his son called to warrant, tenent, of half a carucate of land in Bere, 
which the plaintiffs claimed against Jocelin and which Roger warranted 
to him. Roger acknowledged the land to be the right of Sabina and 
rendered and quit claimed the same for himself and his heirs to Henry 
and Sabina and the heirs of Sabina for ever. For this Henry and 
Sabina gave to Roger thirty marcs of silver. 

[Endorsed.'] Robert de Sideham put in his claim. 

(64) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Richard de la Forde and Cecilia his wife, and Agnes, 
sister of Cecilia, plaintiffs, by the said Richard in the place of Cecilia 
and Agnes, and Richard le Franceis, tenent, of one virgate of land in 



38 Dorset Fines. 



Newenham. Recognizance of the great assize was summoned between 
them. Richard le Franceis acknowledged the land to be the right of 
Cecilia and Agnes and rendered and quit claimed the same for himself 
and his heirs to Richard de la Forde, Cecilia and Agnes and the heirs 
of Cecilia and Agnes for ever. For this they gave to Richard le 
Franceis four and a half marcs of silver. 

(65) At Dorcestre, in the octaves of St. Gregory, between John 
son of Simon de Litlecot, plaintiff, and Ralph, abbot of Binnedun, 
tenent, of a fourth part of a knight's fee in Hethfelderton. John re- 
mitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to the Abbot and 
his successors and his church of Binnedun for ever all his right in 
the said fourth part. For this the Abbot gave to John one marc of 
silver. 

(66) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Robert de Neuburg, plaintiff, and Silvester de Almero, 
tenent, of three hides of land in Almere. Recognizance of the great 
assize was summoned between them. Silvester acknowledged the 
land to be the right of Robert and rendered and quit claimed the same 
for himself and his heirs to Robert and his heirs for ever. For this 
Robert gave to Silvestre one hundred shillings sterling. 

(67) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of St. Gregory, between William 
Abbot of Middeltun, plaintiff, and Robert Le Fiz, tenent, of half a hide 
and half a virgate of land in Sideling. Robert acknowledged the land 
to be the right of the abbot and his church of Middeltun. For this 
the abbot granted it to Robert. To have and to hold to Robert for life 
from the abbot and his successors and his church aforesaid, rendering 
therefor yearly eight shillings, at four terms two shillings, for all 
service. After the death of Robert the land shall revert to the abbot 
and his successors and his church quit from the heirs of Robert for 
ever. 

(68) At Bath, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Robert le Hyreis, plaintiff, and Richard de Ywern, tenent, of one 
virgate of land in Ywern. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. Richard acknowledged and granted to Robert one 
messuage and two ac. of the said land, namely that messuage with the 
curtilage which Edith daughter of Mary held, and two ac. of land 
which lie in Mirifeld towards the north. To have and to hold to 
Robert and his heirs from Richard and his heirs for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one pair of gloves or one penny at Easter, for all service. 
Moreover Richard gave to Robert twenty shillings sterling. For this 
Robert remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Richard 
and his heirs for ever all his right and claim in the remainder of the 
said land. 



II Henry III. (1226-27). 39 

(69) At Ivelcestre, on the morrow of Ash Wednesday, between 
Roger Abbot of Ford, -plaintiff, by Brother William de Blaneford in 
his place, and Roger, Prior of Cristecherche of Twurham (Twineham), 
impedient, by John de Auna, his canon in the Prior's place, of the 
advowson of the church of Burghestokes. The Abbot acknowledged 
the said advowson to be the right of the Prior and his church of 
Cristechirche and remitted and quit claimed the same for himself 
and his successors and his church of Ford to the Prior and his suc- 
cessors and his church of Cristechirche for ever. Be it known that 
Simon de Pillesdun who claimed right in the advowson of the said 
church was present in court and granted this concord, and remitted 
and quit claimed to the Prior and his successors all his right and claim 
in the aforesaid advowson. And the Prior received the Abbot and the 
convent of his place, and his successors, and Simon and his heirs into 
all benefices and orisons which henceforth should be performed in the 
aforesaid church of Cristecherche. 

(70) At Wilton, one month after Easter day, between Henry de la 
Gate, plaintiff, and Philip, Abbot of Schirburn, tenent, by Philip de 
Chartrey in his place, of one hide of land in Brodingeston. Assize of 
mort ancestor was summoned between them. Henry remitted and quit 
claimed for himself and his heirs to the Abbot and his successors and 
his church of Schirburn for ever, all his right and claim in the said 
land. The Abbot received Henry and his heirs into all beneficies 
and orisons which henceforth should be performed in his church of 
Schirburn. 

(71) At Dorcestre, in the octaves of St. Gregory, between Robert 
de Tachehurste and Walter Taylode, plaintiffs, and Philip, Abbot of 
Schirburn, tenen by Philip de Chartrey in his place, of half a hide of 
land in Wuburn. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between 
them. Robert and Walter remitted and quit claimed for themselves 
and their heirs to the Abbot and his successors and his church of 
Schirburn for ever, all their right and claim in the said land. For this 
the Abbot gave to Robert and Walter two marcs of silver. 

(72) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Hugh son of William, plaintiff, by William Russel in 
his place, and William Hayrun, tenent, of one hide of land in Cernemue. 
Recognizance of the great assize was summoned between them. 
Hugh remitted and quit claimed lor himself and his heirs to William 
and his heirs for ever, all his right and claim in the said land. For 
this William gave to Hugh half a marc of silver. 

[Endorsed.'] John Tril puts in his claim on behalf of Agnes his 
wife. 

(73) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the octaves of St. Gregory, 



40 Dorset Fines. 



between William de le Espiney, plaintiff, and Roger, Prior of Criste- 
chirche, tenent, by John de Auna, his canon, in his place, of one virgate 
of land in Childacford. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. William remitted and quit claimed for himself and his 
heirs to the Prior and his successors and his church of Cristeschirche 
for ever all his right and claim in the said land. For this the Prior 
gave to William half a marc of silver. 

(74) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Richard, Abbot of Cerne of the one part, and William, 
Abbot of Middelton of the other part, of a perambulation to be made 
between the land of the Abbot of Cerne in Cerne, and the land of the 
Abbot of Middeltun in Sidelinge. The perambulation is made between 
the said lands by the following metes and limits, namely : that the 
whole of the land from the land and limits of the free men of Helistun 
in the highway near to the stone called Bellingeston towards the 
east, and so by the said highway towards the south, as far as the lands 
of the said Abbots reach (durant) between the aforesaid vills of Cerne 
and Sidelinge, and which land is near the said highway towards the 
east, remains to the Abbot of Cerne and his successors and his church 
of Cerne for ever. And the whole of the land which is near the said 
highway towards the west remains to the Abbot of Middeltun and his 
successors and his church of Middeltun for ever. 

(75) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between William Quentin, complainant, and Robert de Bosco, 
deforciant, of common of pasture in Ringstede, namely : in the whole 
pasture of the said vill. Robert acknowledged and granted to William 
a third part of the common of the said pasture, as belonging to one hide 
of land which he holds in the same vill. To have and to hold to 
William and his heirs quit for ever. So that, if Robert or William or 
their heirs should sell the herbage of the said pasture, Robert and his 
heirs shall have two parts and William and his heirs a third part of all 
the profits arising therefrom. And the other two parts of the common 
of the said pasture remain to Robert and his heirs as belonging to two 
hides of land which he holds in the said vill. Be it known that of all 
the issues arising in respect of their land in the said vill, Robert and 
his heirs shall have two parts and William and his heirs shall have a 
third part. This concord was made saving to Robert and his heirs the 
advowson of the church of the said vill and the water-mill. 

(76) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the octaves of St. Gregory, 
between Osbert Sprotj plaintiff, and William Maureward, who Robert 
son of Thomas called to warrant, of half a virgate of land in Wynter- 
burn, which land Osbert claimed against William and which William 
warranted to Robert. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between 



II Henry II L (1226-27). 4^ 

them. Osbert acknowledged the land to be the right of William. For 
this William granted to Osbert a moiety thereof as it lies towards the 
east in the fields, to have and to hold to Osbert and his heirs from 
William and his heirs for ever. Rendering therefor yearly two shillings 
and half a pound of pepper at two terms of the year, namely at Easter 
twelve pence, and at Michaelmas twelve pence and half a pound of 
pepper, for all, save foreign, service. 

(77) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the octaves of St. Gregory, 
between Walter de Ford, plaintiff, and Juliana Eskelling, tenent, of 
eight shillings of rent in Acford Eskelling. Assize of mort ancestor 
was summoned between them. Juliana acknowledged the rent to be 
the right of Walter and rendered it to him. For this Walter granted 
the rent to Juliana, to have and to hold to her and her heirs from 
Walter and his heirs for ever. Rendering therefor yearly five shillings 
at two terms, namely a moiety at Easter and a moiety at Michaelmas 
for all, save foreign, service. 

(78) At Dorcestre, in the octaves of St. Gregory, between William 
son of William, plaintiff, and Walter Aurifaber, tenent, of two messuages 
in Wimbume. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. 
William remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Walter 
and his heirs for ever all his right and claim in the messuages. For 
this Walter gave to William forty pence, 

(79) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Jordan de Sarmunvile, plaintiff, and Philip de Sarmunvile, 
tenent, of two hides of land in Langeton and in Waie. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Jordan remitted and quit 
claimed for himself and his heirs to Philip and his heirs for ever all his 
right and claim in the land. For this Philip gave and granted to 
Jordan a moiety of the manor of Stertes with the capital messuage and 
garden to the same moiety belonging, which the said Philip held on the 
day this concord was made, in demesnes and rents, in homages and 
services of free men, in villeinages and in all other things to the said 
moiety belonging, saving to Philip and his heirs the advowson of the 
church of the said vill. To have and to hold to Jordan and his heirs 
from Philip and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the service of half a 
knight, for all service. 

(80) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of St. Gregory, between Adam 
Crabbe, plaintiff, and Hugh, Abbot of Abbotesbir, tenent, of one virgate 
and a half of land in Horrugge. Assize of mort ancestor was sum- 
moned between them. The Abbot acknowledged the land to be the 
right of Adam and rendered it to him, to have and to hold to Adam and 
his heirs from the Abbot and his successors and his church of Abbotes- 
bir lor ever. Rendering therefor yearly five shillings, at four terms 



42 Dorset Fines, 



fifteen pence, for all service. For this Adam gave to the Abbot two 
marcs of silver. 

(8i) At Dorcestre, on the morrow of the Anunciation of the Blessed 
Mary, between Nicholas Malemains, complainant, and John de Baiocis, 
deforciant, of common of pasture in Upwinburne, namely in the rifletum 
(ruffletum) of Pert, whereof Nicholas complained that John unjustly de- 
manded that common, inasmuch as Nicholas had no common in the 
land of John, neither did John do service to him whereby he ought to 
have that common. John acknowledged the pasture to be the right of 
Nicholas. For this Nicholas gave and granted to John forty ac. of 
land in the said " rifletum " which lie within the metes and limits follow- 
ing. That is to say : from the foot of Bochelaueshull as far as the 
south head of La Brodelande and thence from the transverse (extrans- 
verso) of Stodenhull as far as the transverse {ad transversum) of the 
marl pit (Marlere) and so as far as the west part of La Suelghesheude, 
and three and a half perches of land on the west part of La Suelghes- 
heude, and thence as far as the nearest water duct by the western part 
of Hobeleswell and from Hobeleswell descending " in oblique '* ( ? in the 
slope) of the said duct as far as Bochelaueshull. To have and to hold 
to John and his heirs from Nicholas and his heirs for ever. Rendering 
therefor yearly one pair of gilt spurs or six pence at Michaelmas for all 
service or any common which the said John or his heirs ought to have 
outside the said limits. But John and his heirs may enclose those forty 
acres of land at their will, so that no other may have common there. 
And Nicholas and his heirs will warrant the said land to John and his 
heirs as is aforesaid against all people. If Nicholas or his heirs are 
not able to warrant that land to John and his heirs they shall give him 
in exchange the value thereof in the said vill. Be it known that John 
did homage to Nicholas at the Court in respect of the said land. 

(82) At Wiltun, fifteen days after Easter day, between Audoenus 
de Immere, complainant, and Richard de Lauerkestokes and Alice his 
wife, impedients, of a moiety of the vill of Crokeston. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Richard and Alice 
acknowledged the same to be the right of Audoenus as that which he 
had by gift from William Croc, father of Alice, in demesnes and rents, 
in vileinages ^ and woods, in meadows and pasture and in all other 
things to the said moiety belonging. To have and to hold to Audoenus 
and his heirs from Richard and Alice and the heirs of Alice for ever. 
Rendering therefor yearly one pound of pepper at Michaelmas for all, 
save foreign, service, as much as belongs to that moiety. Saving to 
Matilda who was wife of John Croc and Aline who was wife of 



^ (?) Word indistinct. 



12 Henry II L (1227-28). 43 

William Croc for their lives lands which they held by name of 
dower in the moiety of the said Audoenus on the day this concord 
was made. After their deaths a moiety of the lands which Matilda 
and Alina held as is aforesaid shall revert to Audoenus and his 
heirs quit. So long as Alina lives, Audoenus and his heirs shall have 
four shillings yearly from the tenement which Peter Croc holds in the 
said vill, and two shillings yearly from the tenement which John son of 
Roger holds. Saving to Richard and Alice and the heirs of Alice all other 
customs and services which Peter and John owe for their tenements. 
After the death of Aline, when Audoenus or his heirs shall have a 
moiety of the land which she holds in dower as is aforesaid, the said 
rent of six shillings yearly shall revert to Richard and Alice and the 
heirs of Alice quit from Audoenus and his heirs for ever. And then 
Autoenus and his heirs shall hold the part that shall fall to him from 
the said two dowers together with all the land which Audoenus held in 
the said vill by the service aforesaid. 

(83) At Wilton, one month after Easter day, between Hamo son 
of Robert, plaintiff, and Richard de Mapudre, tenent, of one virgate of 
land in Mapudre. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between 
them. Hamo acknowledged the land to be the right of Richard. 
To have and to hold to Richard for life from Hamo and his heirs, 
doing therefor as much foreign service as belongs to the said land, for 
all service. After the death of Richard the land shall remain to the 
nuns and their church of Tarente. To hold to them from Hamo and 
his heirs by the service aforesaid for ever. For this Richard gave to 
Hamo half a marc of silver. 

(84) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. Andrew the Apostle, 
between Brother Robert, Prior of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem 
in England, by Brother Manasser in his place, of the one part, plaintiff, 
and Hamo de Burton and Agatha his wife of the other part, impedients, 
of the advowson of the church of Kinchetinton. Hamo and Agatha 
acknowledged and quit claimed for themselves and their heirs to the 
the Prior and his successors all the right and claim they should or 
could have in the said advowson for ever. For this the Prior received 
Hamo and Agatha into all benefices which should be performed in the 
Hospital aforesaid for ever. 

12 Henry III. (1227-28). 

(85) At Schirbum, Thursday next after Trinity, between John 
son of Baldewin, plaintiff, and William son of Baldewin, tenent, of 
three virgates of land in Cumbe and in Sapwikes. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. John acknowledged the land 



44 Dorset Fines, 



to be the right of William. For this William gave and granted to 
John one virgate of the said land in Cumbe, which land lies from La 
Cnolle towards the east. To have and to hold to John and his heirs 
from William and his heirs for ever. Rendering therefor yearly five 
shillings at two terms, namely a moiety at Easter and a moiety at 
Michaelmas for all, save foreign, service. 

(86) At Wilton, Sunday next after the feast of St. Peter ad Vincula, 
between Master Roger de Wurth, plaintiff, and John de Perham, 
tenent, of half a hide except one ferling of land in Perham ; and be- 
tween the said Roger plaintiff, and Nicholas de Perham whom Stephen 
de Perham called to warrant, of one ferling of land in the same vill 
and whereof the said Nicholas called the said John to warrant, and 
which land John warranted to Nicholas and Stephen. Roger ac- 
knowledged the land to be the right of John. To have and to hold to 
John and his heirs from Roger and his successors and his prebend of 
Bemenistre for ever. Rendering therefor yearly twenty shillings at 
two terms, namely a moiety at Michaelmas and a moiety at Easter for 
all service. This concord was made there being present Nicholas and 
Stephen agreeing thereto. Be it known that Richard, Bishop of 
Salisbury and William, Dean, and the chapter, sent their letters patents 
ratifying and accepting this concord. 

(87) At Taunton, on the Sunday next before the Feast of St. 
Peter ad Vincula, between Thomas Attemede and Roisia his wife and 
Adam Drake and Emma his wife, plaintiffs, and Robert de Cheseburn- 
ford whom Isabella de Cheseburnford called to warrant of two virgates 
of land and two messuages in Cheseburnford, and which land and 
messuages the plaintiffs claim against Isabella, and which land and 
messuages Robert warranted to Isabella. Assize of mort ancestor 
was summoned between them. Thomas and Roesia, Adam and 
Emma remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of 
Roesia and Emma, to Robert and his heirs for ever all their right and 
claim in the said land and messuages. For this Robert gave them two 
marcs of silver. 

(88) At Taunton, on the Sunday next before the Feast of St. Peter 
ad Vincula, between Reginald de Mohun, plaintiff, and Reginald de 
St. Leodegar and Juliana his mother, tenents, of half a knight's tee in 
Toddebir. Reginald de Mohun acknowledged the same to be the right 
of the tenents, to have and to hold to them and their heirs from Regi- 
nald de Mohun and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the service of 
half a knight's fee for all service. For this Reginald de St. Leodegar 
and Juliana gave to Reginald de Mohun thirty marcs of silver. 

(89) At Exeter, on the morrow of St. Peter the Apostle, between 
Geoffrey de Kurnell and Gundreda his wife and Isolda de Stanton, 



12 Henry III, (1227-28). 45 

plaintiffs, by William de Kurnell in their place, and Bartholomew de 
Turbervill, tenent, of the manors of Winterburn and Melebir. Assize 
of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Geoffrey, Gundreda 
and Isolda remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of 
Gundreda and Isolda, to Bartholomew and his heirs for ever all their 
claim in the said manors. For this the tenent granted to them twelve 
pounds of rent in the manor of Anesty in co. Wilts, which Walter de 
Turbervill, father of Bartholomew, and the said Bartholomew were 
accustomed to take yearly from the Prior and Friars of the Hospital of 
Jerusalem in England in respect of the said manor of Anesty. To have 
and to hold to Geoffrey, Gundreda and Isolda and the heirs of Gundreda 
and Isolda for ever from the chief lords of that fee. If Bartholomew 
should die without heirs of his body, the manors of Winterburn and 
Melebir will revert to Geoffrey, Gundreda and Isolda and the heirs of 
Gundreda and Isolda quit for ever. Moreover Bartholomew gave to 
the plaintiffs two hundred marcs of silver. Be it known that Bartholo- 
mew de Turbervill at the court rendered to the plaintiffs the chyrograph 
made between Robert de Dine, Prior of the Hospital of Jerusalem in 
England, complainant, and Walter de Turbervill, father of Bartholomew, 
impedient, of the manor of Anesty. 

Endorsed, [Note.  The last paragraph is endorsed on the docu- 
ment] 

(90) At Taunton on the Sunday next before the Feast of St. Peter 
ad Vincula, between William Le Pipere, plaintiff, and Henry, Abbot of 
Syrebum, tenent, by Philip de Charteray in his place, of three and a 
half virgates of land in Lega. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. William remitted and quit claimed for himself and his 
heirs to the Abbot and' his successors and his church of Syreburn for 
ever all his right and claim in the said land. For this the Abbot gave 
to William half a marc of silver. 

(91) At Wynton, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
John de Esefeud and Matillida his wife, complainants and William de 
Wytefeud and Matillida de Monasteriis, his wife, impedients, by 
Geoffrey de Wytefeud in William's place and Thomas de Wytefeud in 
Matillida' s place, of the vill of Perlee. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned between them. William and Matillida acknowledged the 
vill to be the right of Matillida de Esefeud in demesnes and rents, 
in homages services of free men and in all other things to the said vill 
pertaining, together with the advowson of the church of the said vill, 
and likewise the homage and service of Robert de Monasteriis in 
Tarente for the tenement he held from them in the said vill, also all the 
rent and tenement which the said William and Matillida had in moor 
land. To have and to hold to John and Matillida de Esefeud and the 



46 Dorset Fines. 



heirs of Matillida from William and Matillida de Monasteriis and the 
heirs of Matillida for ever, doing therefor the service of half a knight 
for all service. For this the complainants remitted to the impedients 
forty shillings for the damage sustained by them against the aforesaid deed. 
The impedients granted for themselves and thei r heirs that they will warrant 
all the aforesaid tenements to John and Matillida de Esefeud against 
all men for ever. 

(92) At Exeter, on St. Mary Magdalen's day, between Lucas 
Russel, plaintiff, and Roger le Flameng, tenent, of five virgates of land 
in Wutton. Lucas remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs 
to Roger and his heirs all his right and claim in the said land for ever. 
For this Roger gave to Lucas eighty marcs of silver. 

(93) At Winton, one month after Easter day, between Stephen de 
Stokes, and Alice his wife and Emma sister of Alice, plaintiffs, and 
William de Mohun, tenent, of two virgates of land in Hamme. Assize 
of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Stephen, Alice and 
Emma remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of Alice 
and Emma to William and his heirs for ever, all their right and claim 
in the said land and also all the right and claim in the surplus of the 
manor of Hamme which they might or could have. For this William 
gave to the plaintiffs ten and a half marcs of silver. 

(94) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Richard, Bishop of Salisbury, complainant, by Master Elyas de . . * 
in his place, and Agnes de Candel, deforciant, of the vill of Candel, 
whereof the Bishop complained that Agnes came against a covenant 
made between them concerning the said vill. Plea of covenant was 
summoned between them. Agnes acknowledged the said vill to be 
the right of the Bishop and his church of Salisbury and remitted and 
quit claimed the same for herself and her heirs to the Bishop and his 
successors and his church of Salisbury for ever. For this the Bishop 
gave to Agnes ten marcs of silver. 

(95) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Richard, Bishop of Salisbury, complainant, by Master Elyas de 
Derham in his place, and PhiHp * . . . deforciant, of two carucates 
of land m Wotton, which Baldewyn Dispensator in the county of 
Dorset claimed against Philip by ... of right (de recto), and 
which two carucates the Bishop said were the right of his church of 
Salisbury. Covenant was made between the Bishop and Philip in 
the county aforesaid, to which Philip afterwards denied that he should 
hold. Plea of covenant was summoned between them in the Court. 



' Part of document torn off, but see next fine for attorney's name. 
* Part of document torn off. 



12 Henry II L (1227-28). 47 

Philip acknowledged the land to be the right of the Bishop and his 
church of Salisbury and rendered the same to him, and remitted and 
quit claimed it for himself and his heirs to the Bishop and his suc- 
cessors and his aforesaid church for ever. For this the Bishop gave 
and granted to Philip two and a half virgates of land in Shireburn, 
namely : one virgate which Osmund de Wotton held, half a virgate 
which Alficus de Wotton held, half a virgate which John son of 
Godwin held, half a virgate which William de Dolling of Shireburn 
held, one croft in Dotleng outside the park of Shireburn which 
contains five acres, one spinney (Spineta), in the said vill which 
contains nine ac. and one perch. To have and to hold to Philip and 
his heirs from the Bishop and his successors and his church of Salis- 
bury' for ever, rendering therefor yearly half a pound of cumin at 
Michaelmas for all service and exaction, save as much foreign service 
as belongs to the said land. Moreover the Bishop acknowledged and 
granted to be the right of Philip, all the rent, which the said Philip 
previously took from the salt pits near Kyhaven, which salt pits Nigel 
de Kyhaven held. To have and to hold to Philip and his heirs from 
the Bishop and his successors and his church of Salisbury for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly thirty-one and a half quarters of salt and 
half a pound of cumin at the Nativity of St John the Baptist for all 
service and exaction. 

(96) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Richard, Bishop of Salisbury complainant, by Master ^ . . de 
Derham in his place to gain or lose, and Baldwin son of Walter 
Dispensator deforciant of two carucates of land in Witton which 
Baldwin claimed against Philip de Witton in the county of Dorset by 
the King's writ of right (pbre dni Reg. de r'to) whereof Baldwin after- 
wards remitted to the Bishop, with Philip's consent, all his right, by 
covenant made between them as the Bishop said, and whereof Baldwin 
did not recognize the convenant Plea of convenant was summoned be- 
tween them. Baldwin remitted and quit claimed for himself and his 
heirs to the Bishop and his successors and his church of Salisbury all 
his right and claim in the said land for ever. For this the Bishop 
gave and granted to Baldwin two hides of land in Hourelington, 
namely all the land which the Bishop previously held in the said vill. 
To have and to hold to Baldwin and his heirs from the Bishop and 
his successors and his church of Salisbury for ever, rendering there- 
for yearly, twenty shillings sterling, at four terms five shillings, and 
doing as much foreign service as belongs to the said land for all service 
and exaction. Moreover the Bishop acknowledged and granted one 

^ Part of document torn off, no doubt Elyas as in previous fine. 



48 Dorset Fines. 

virgate of land in Wichokes, which Baldwin previously held, to be the 
right of Baldwin. To have and to hold to Baldwin and his heirs from 
the Bishop and his successors and his church of Salisbury for ever, 
doing therefor as much foreign service as belongs to the said land for 
all service and exaction. 

13 Henry III. (1228-29). 

(97) At Westminster^ between Robert 

, complainant, and John de Baiocis and Matilda his wife, 

deforciants hundred of Witchurch. 

Whereof the said Robert exacts from them that they 

said hundred at three lawedayes, namely on the morrow 

of St Hokeday. And that the 

tithing of the said John and Matilda of Lym 

years whether he should hold the land or not. So that if the tithing- 
man should be in mercy of Robert at any of the aforesaid three days, 

the whole in mercy of Robert. And from 

that day at the said hundred. 

The said Tithingman to hear his judgment therein. And if any of the 

said tithing of John and Matilda any plea 

which by that hundred ought to be determined, namely by bread or ale 
sold or made against the assize or by any offence on account of which 
they ought to be attached, the same man shall sue the said hundred, 
from hundred to hundred there shall be deter- 
mined. And that John and Matilda or their attorneys and the said 
Tithingman shall sue in all the other hundreds yearly. And if any 
stranger shall come to the said tithing or any one from the hundred 

years shall come to the said hundred and 

shall swear fealty to the King and shall ^vt, one penny to the seijeant 
of the hundred. And that Robert first may buy his fish in the said 
land of John and Matilda de Lym that he may have thirteen .... 
of fish for twelve pence which suits the said John and Matilda did not 
acknowledge to him. John and Matilda for themselves and the 
heirs of Matilda acknowledged to Robert and his heirs that all their 
men holding land in Lym who shall not be at sea, without hindrance 
shall come to the hundred of Witchurch of Robert and his heirs at two 
"lawedayes" yearly, namely on the morrow of Hokeday and on the 
morrow of St. Michael. And if the Tithingman of John and Matilda or 
the heirs of Matilda shall be in the mercy of Robert or his heirs for any 
offence in the said hundred, whereof John and Matilda or the heirs of 
Matilda are not able to have their Court, as otherwise a free man of 

' Several pieces of the document are torn off. 



13 Henry II L (1228-29). 49 

that hundred ought to have, the- Tithingman with the whole tithing 
holding land shall be amerced in the said hundred according to the law 
of the land and the gravity of the offence (quantitatem delicti). And 
when any of the said tithingmen born on the land of John and Matilda 
or the heirs of Matilda shall become of full age, he shall come to the 
said hundred and swear fealty to the King and shall be quit of suit of 
the hundred until he shall hold the land. So that meanwhile he shall 
be in friburg (in frithborg). And if any of the said men of John and 
Matilda or the heirs of Matilda holding land shall be at sea at any of 
the lawehundreds, who shall have a plea upon him, whereof John and 
Matilda or the heirs of Matilda are not able to have their Court as other- 
wise a free man of that hundred [ought to have], when he shall come to 
the land he shall sue the said hundred of Witchurch, from hundred to 
hundred, as the hundred shall be held, until that plea there shall be 
determined. And if any one shall be taken prisoner on the land of 
John and Matilda or the heirs of Matilda of Lym, he shall be led to the 
said hundred by the men of John and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda. 
And the said Tithingman and bailiff of John and Matilda shall sue the 
said hundred from hundred to hundred until the prisoner shall there 
have his judgment. And John and Matilda for themselves and the heirs 
of Matilda have granted, as far as to them it pertains, that Robert and 
his heirs shall have reasonable achat (achatum suum) in all saleable 
articles (venalibus) in the said land and market of Lym for ever. More- 
over, John and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda, shall give every year to 
Robert and his heirs ten shillings sterling, to be taken at Lym, namely 
at Easter and Michaelmas five shillings. For this Robert for himself 
and his heirs has released to John and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda, 
all his right and claim in the residue of all the aforesaid suits at the 
hundred for ever. John and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda did 
homage to Robert and his heirs in respect of the said suit at the afore- 
said hundred of Witchurch and in respect of the aforesaid market of 
Lym, according as is aforesaid. Moreover John and Matilda gave to 
Robert ten marcs of silver. 

(98) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Invention of the Holy 
Cross, between Richard Marescall and Gervase his wife, plaintiffs, by 
Robert Portejoie in the place of Gervase, and Henry son of Warin, 
tenent, by Giles de Craneborne in his place, of one virgate of land in 
Herdebrig. Henry acknowledged the land to be the right of Gervase 
and rendered it to her at the Court. For this Richard and Gervase 
gave and granted to Henry four and a half acres of meadow, out of the 
said land, near to the river of Avene. To have and to hold to Henry 
and his heirs from Richard and Gervase and the heirs of Gervase for 
ever. Rendering therefor yearly six pence at Michaelmas and doing 

4 



JO Dorset Fines. 



such foreign service as belongs to the said four and a half acres of 
meadow for all service and exaction. 

14 Henry III. (1229-30). 

(99) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Apostles Symon and 
Jude, between Margery daughter of Philip, plaintiff, and William, 
Abbot of Middelton, tenent, by John Belet, in his place, of half a hide 
of land in Upsidelinch. A duel in arms was waged between them in 
the Court. The Abbot acknowledged the land to be the right of 
Margery to have and to hold to Margery and her heirs from the Abbot 
and his successors and his church of Middelton for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one marc of silver, at four terms three shillings and 
four pence, for all service and exaction. For this Margery gave to the 
Abbot half a marc of silver. 

15 Henry HI. (1230-31). 

(100) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. Martin, between Ela, 
Countess of Salisbury, plaintiff, by William de Erneford in her place, 
and William Briwerr, whom Reginald de Mown and Osbert Giffard 
called to warrant and who warranted them, by Warin son of Joel in 
his place, of four carucates of land in Wynterburn. William de Erne- 
ford acknowledged, by his said attorney, the land to be the right of 
the Countess. For this she granted it to William, to have and to 
hold to William and his heirs from the Countess and her heirs for ever, 
doing therefor the service of half a knight's fee for all service and ex- 
action. The Countess and her heirs will warrant the land to William 
and his heirs by the service aforesaid, against all men for ever. More- 
over William gave to the Countess two hundred marcs of silver. 

(10 1) At Westminster, fifteen days after Martinmas day, between 
William de Dingeham, complainant, and Groffrey de Haukes and 
Alice his wife, impedients, of a third part of a knight's fee in Wolueton. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Geoffrey and 
Alice acknowledged the third part to be the right of William as that 
which he had by their gift. To have and to hold to William and his 
heirs from Geoffrey and Alice and the heirs of Alice for ever, doing 
therefor such foreign service as belongs to the said third part. Geoffrey 
and Alice and the heirs of Alice, will warrant to William and his heirs 
the said third part by the said service against all people for ever. For 
this William gave to Geoffrey and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

(102) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Aco 
de Wunlande, plaintiff, and William son of Hugh de Mapheldre, 
tenent, of one carucate of land in Wunland. Aco remitted and quit 
claimed for himself and his heirs to William and his heirs all his right 



17 Henry II L (1232-33). 51 

and claim in the land for ever. For this William gave to Aco thirteen 
and a half marcs of silver. 

(103) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. Katherine, between 
William de Bingham, complainant, and Geoffrey de Haukes and Alice 
his wife, impedients, of two parts of a knight's fee in Esse and Woz. 
Plea of warrant of deed was summoned between them. Geoffrey and 
Alice acknowledged the land in all things to be the right of William and 
Cecilia his wife, as that which they gave to William in marriage with 
Cecilia. To have and to hold to William and Cecilia and the heirs of 
Cecilia's body begotten by William, from Geoffrey and Alice and the 
heirs of Alice for ever, doing therefor such service as to that land 
belongs, for all service, Geoffrey and Alice and the heirs of Alice will 
warrant the said land by the said service to William and Cecilia and 
the heirs of Cecilia begotten by William, against all people for ever. 
Should Cecilia happen to die without heirs of her body leaving William 
surviving, the land shall remain to him to hold during his life by the 
aforesaid service. After his death the land reverts to Geoffrey and Alice 
and the heirs of Alice quit for ever. For this William gave to Geoffrey 
and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

(104) At Westminster, on the octave of St. Hillary, between Peter 
de Rusceaus, plaintiff, and Robert de Newburg, tenent, of two hides 
and two virgates of land in Almere. Peter remitted and quit claimed 
for himself and his heirs to Robert and his heirs all his right and claim 
in the land for ever. For this Robert gave to Peter twenty five marcs 
of silver. Be it known that if Peter or his heirs henceforth produce 
any charters or other muniments against Robert or his heirs contrary 
to this fine they shall be void. 

(105) At Westminster, three weeks after Easter day, between Ela, 
Countess of Salisbury, plaintiff, by John le Danays and Henry de 
Albaniaco in her place, and Hugh de Vallibus, tenent, of ten librates of 
land in Kynestanton. The Countess acknowledged the same to be the 
right of Hugh. To have and to hold to Hugh and his heirs from the 
Countess and her heirs for ever, doing therefor the service of a sixth 
part of a knight's fee for all service. For this Hugh gave to the 
Countess eighty marcs of silver. 

17 Henry III. (1232-33). 

(106) At Westminster, three weeks after Easter day, between 
Isabella de Frome, plaintiff, and Gregory de Turribus and Emma his 
wife, tenents, of a moiety of two parts of a kiyght's fee, except twenty 
one acres of land, in Frome. Gregory and Emma acknowledged the 
same, as in demesnes, rents, vileinages, services and in all other things 



52 Dorset Fines, 



to be the right of Isabella and rendered the same to her at the Court, ex- 
cepting the capital messuage which remains quit to Gregory and Emma 
and the heirs of Emma. In exchange for which capital messuage Gregory 
and Emma have granted to Isabella that half virgate of land and that 
messuage or curtilage and half acre of meadow which Osbert Beghe 
formerly held in Frome, and one acre of land which lies in Oserwurth 
in the upper part of La Cumbe, with free entry and egress to the water 
of Frome without hindrance from Gregory and Emma and the heirs 
of Emma for ever. Moreover they have acknowledged and granted 
for themselves and the heirs of Emma, that Isabella and her heirs may 
have the moiety which belongs to them of all lands and tenements 
which were of Constance, aunt of Isabella and Emma, wherever they 
shall be, in demesnes, rents, vileinages, services and in all other things. 
For this Isabella granted for herself and her heirs, that Gregory and 
Emma and the heirs of Emma shall first present a clerk to the Bishop 
of the place at the church of Frome, after whose death Isabella or her 
heirs shall present a clerk to the said church, and so from clerk to clerk, 
Gregory, Emma, Isabella and the heirs of Emma and Isabella at 
alternate times for ever. 

(107) At Westminster, on Wednesday next after the feast of All 
Saints, between Michael de Dagevill and Isabella his wife, plaintiffs, 
and William de Bingeham, tenent, of a third part of a knight's fee in 
Wolueton. Michael and Isabella remitted and quit claimed for them- 
selves and the heirs of Isabella to William and his heirs all their right 
and claim in the said third part for ever. For this William gave to 
Michael and Isabella forty shillings sterling. 

(108) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St Hillary, 
between Isabella who was the wife of Hugh de Gundevile, plaintiff, 
and John, son of Ansell, who Walter de Toulard and Roger de Stures 
called to warrant and who warranted them of a third part of fourteen 
and a half virgates of land in Stubehampton and in Tarente, which 
third part Isabella claimed in dower as of the free hold which Was of 
Hugh formerly her husband, in the said vills. Isabella remitted and 
quit claimed for herself to John and his heirs her right and claim in 
the said third part in name of dower. For this John gave and granted 
to Isabella two virgates of land in the manor of Tarente, namely half 
a virgate which John Curewin held, and half a virgate which John 
Kene held, and one virgate which Nicholas de Tarente held in vileinage 
with the vilein holding that vileinage and all his belongings (sequalia). 
To have and to hold to Isabella for life together with all the lands and 
tenements which she previously held in the said vills of Stubehampton 
and Tarente in name of dower. 



1 8 Henry III. (1233-34). 53 

18 Henry III. (1233-34). 

(109) At ^ . . . , one month after . . . , between the Abbess 
of St. Edward's, complainant, by ... in her place, and Eudo 
. . . ( ? Martel) and Margareta his wife, deforciants, of customs and 
services which the Abbess exacts from them . . . -oldurton. Whereof 
she exacts that they should render to her four pounds . . . and 
twelve quarters of malt (brasium), namely, two grains of barley and the 
third grain of wheat, and twelve quarters of contrabrasium (counter- 
malt ?), namely, two grains of oats and the third grain of barley for the 
said tenement. Moreover forty-nine pounds of arrears of the service 
aforesaid. Which customs and services Eudo and Margareta did not 
acknowledge to her. The deforciants have acknowledged and granted 
for themselves and the heirs of Margareta, that they would render every 
year to the Abbess and other Abbesses who should succeed her, and to 
her church of St. Edward the same service of four pounds and five 
shillings, at four terms namely Christmas twenty shillings, Easter 
twenty shillings, St. John Baptist twenty shillings and Michael- 
mas twenty-five shillings, and the service of the whole of the wheat 
aforesaid within the terms of Michaelmas and Easter next following, 
every year for ever for the said tenement, or within the same term in 
which the other farmers of the Abbess are accustomed to render the 
wheat and malt. Moreover that they should render to the Abbess forty 
pounds for the said arrears namely at Christmas next after this concord 
ten pounds, Easter ten pounds, St. John Baptist ten pounds and 
Michaelmas ten pounds. And if they make default in the said payment 
of the service and arrears at the terms aforesaid, then the Abbess and 
other Abbesses who may succeed her and her church of St. Edward 
may distrain Eudo and Margareta and the heirs of Margareta by their 
chattels found on the tenement aforesaid, until full payment be made. 
But if they shall be distrained in the said tenement there shall be 
allowed to Eudo and Margareta and the heirs of Margareta in their 
payment, all things which the Abbess and other Abbesses have taken 
therefrom by view of lawful men. Be it known that Eudo and Mar- 
gareta and the heirs of Margareta shall cause the wheat and malt to be 
carried as far as St. Edward's, as other farmers of the Abbess do. For 
this the Abbess remitted and quit claimed for herself and the other 
Abbesses who should succeed her and the church of St. Edward, to 
Eudo and Margareta and the heirs of Margareta all her right and claim 
in the surplus of the arrears of the said service which she exacted from 
them up to the day this concord was made. 

(no) At Westminster, fifteen days after Holy Trinity, between 

1 Part of document torn off. 



54 Dorset Fines. 



Ralph Baraage, plaintiff, and Benedict de Bere, tenent, whom Robert 
son of Fromund called to warrant and who warranted him of one hide 
of land in Nutford. Benedict acknowledged the land to be the right of 
Ralph and rendered it to him at the Court. To have and to hold to 
Ralph and his heirs from Benedict and his heirs for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly two shillings, at two terms twelve pence, for all, save 
foreign, service, as much as belongs to one hide of land of the same fee 
in that vill. For this Ralph gave to Benedict sixty marcs of silver. 

\Endorsed^ 
The Prior of Eton puts in his claim for the Prioress of Eton. 

19 Henry III. (1234-35). 

(hi) At Rading, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Robert 
de Lexinton, complainant, and Thomas Briton (Thomam Britonem) 
and Alice his wife, impedients, of a third part of a knight's fee in Blane- 
ford. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. The 
impedients acknowledged the third part to be the right of Robert, as 
that which he had by their gift. To have and to hold to Robert and 
his heirs from Thomas and Alice and the heirs of Alice for ever, doing 
therefor the service of a third part of one knight for all service and 
exaction. And Thomas and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant, 
acquit and defend the said third part by the said service to Robert and 
his heirs against all people for ever. For this Robert gave to Thomas 
and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

20 Henry HI. (1235-36). 

(112) At Schirburn, Wednesday next after the feast of St. Katherine, 
between Emma who was the wife of William Avenel, plaintiff, and 
Jordan de Insula and Emma his wife, tenents, of half a carucate of 
land in Lullewurth Gatemareston. And between the said Emma, 
plaintiff, and Warin de Noneton and Margery his wife, tenents, of 
half a carucate of land in the said vill. Jordan, Emma, Warin and 
Margery acknowledged all the land to be the right of the plaintiff. 
For this she granted to them the said land. To have and to hold 
to Jordan and Emma, Warin and Margery and the heirs of Emma 
and Margery from the plaintiff, rendering therefor yearly during her 
life, one marc at two terms, namely a moiety at Easter and the other 
moiety at Michaelmas for all service and exaction. Be it known that 
the tenents, at the instance of the plaintiff, have granted to Robert 
Avenel two virgates of land in Chafecumbe, which the plaintiff held in 
dower and which was of the inheritance of Emma and Margery, namely, 
three ferlings of land which Ralph le Sege held, half a virgate which 



20 Henry III. (1235-36). 55 

William de Wogheuede held, half a virgate which Mathew Faber held 
and nine acres which Alured de Wogheneued held. To have and to 
hold to Robert and the heirs of his body begotten from Jordan and 
Emma, Warin and Margery and the heirs of Emma and Margery for 
ever, rendering therefor yearly eight pence at Michaelmas for all, save 
foreign, service, as much as belongs to the said land. If Robert 
should die without heirs of his body begotten, all the said land shall 
revert to Jordan and Emma, Warin and Margery and the heirs of 
Emma and Margery quit for ever. Moreover if Robert should die 
and the said plaintiff survive him, she shall hold the said two virgates 
during her life in name of dower as before she held it. After her 
decease it shall revert to Jordan and Emma, Warin and Margery and 
the heirs of Emma and Margery for ever. 

(113) At Schirburn, Thursday next before the feast of St. Andrew, 
between Peter de Horton and Isabella his wife, John de Campeny and 
Matilda his wife, plaintiffs, by Peter in Isabella's place, and Robert, 
Abbot of Binedon, tenent, of one mill in Craneburn. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Peter and Isabella, John 
and Matilda acknowledged the mill to be the right of the Abbot and 
his church of Binedon. For this the Abbot granted it to Peter and 
Isabella, John and Matilda. To have and to hold to them and the 
heirs of Isabella and Matilda from the Abbot and his successors and 
his church of Binedon for ever. Rendering therefor yearly twenty 
shillings at two terms, namely one moiety at Christmas and the other 
moiety at St. John Baptist for all service and exaction. 

(114) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Reginald 
Loke, plaintiff, and Robert de Bedwind and Cristiana his wife, 
tenents, of three messuages in Dorcestre. Assize of mort ancestor 
was summoned between them. Reginald remitted and quit claimed 
for himself and his heirs to Robert and Cristiana and their heirs 
all his right and claim in the messuages for ever. For this Robert 
and Cristiana gave to Reginald four marcs of silver. 

\EndorsedS\ 
The Prior of the Hospital of Jerusalem in England put in his claim 
by brother Ralph de Tinemue. 

{115) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Bar- 
tholomew de Turbervill, plaintiff, and William de Vergelay, tenent, of 
half a virgate of land in Froggemore. And between the said Bar- 
tholomew, plaintiff, and the said William, tenent, whom Thomas Bouet 
called to warrant and who warranted to him of half a hide of land 
in La Berghe. Bartholomew acknowledged the same to be the right 
of William. To have and to hold to William and his heirs from 
Bartholomew and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the service of the 



56 Dorset Fines. 



eleventh part of a knight's fee for all service and exaction. For this 
William gave to Bartholomew six marcs of silver. 

(116) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Michael 
de Neweton, plaintiff, and William de Frome, tenent, of one virgate 
and two ac. of land in Frome. William acknowledged the land to be 
the right of Michael and rendered it to him at the court and remitted 
and quit claimed the same for himself and his heirs to Michael and 
his heirs for ever. For this Michael gave to William half a marc of 
silver. 

(117) At Shirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Thomas 
son of David, plaintiff, and John de Hoggeshurst and Isabella his 
wife, tenents, of one carucate of land in Hoggeshurst. Thomas 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to John and 
Isabella and the heirs of Isabella, all the right and claim he had in the 
said land for ever. For this John and Isabella gave to Thomas nine 
marcs of silver. 

(118) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between John de 
Hauleya, plaintiff, and Nicholas, Prior of Christ's church, tenent, of 
two carucates of land in Bernardeslee. John remitted and quit claimed 
for himself and his heirs to the Prior and his successors and his 
church all his right and claim in the land for ever. For this the 
Prior gave to John forty marcs of silver. If John or his heirs hence- 
forth shall produce any charter or muniment of the said land it shall 
be void. 

(119) At Schirburn, on the morrow of St. Andrew, between Adam 
Schirard and Geoffrey de Wermewell, complainants, and Eudo Martel, 
whom Helewisia Martel called to warrant and who warranted her, of 
common of pasture in Meurigge, whereof Adam and Geoffrey complain 
that Helewisia unjustly exacted common in their land at Meurigge 
inasmuch as they had no common in the land of Helewisia in Maine, 
neither did Helewisia do service to them whereby she ought to have 
common. Adam and Geoffrey for themselves and their heirs granted 
that Eudo and his heirs and their men of Mayne may have their 
common for the whole in the said pasture of Meurigge for all the 
cattle unemployed (ociosa). Rendering yearly for the said pasture three 
shillings at Michaelmas. For this Eudo granted for himself and his 
heirs that all his men of Mayne who hold his land in vileinage may 
do to the said Adam and Geoffrey and their heirs one " aratura " yearly 
at Michaelmas with their ploughs for one day at the will of Adam 
and Geoffrey and their heirs, and likewise one ^^precaria" in the 
autumn for one day to sow their wheat. Namely from each house one 
man at the board (ad cibum) of Adam and Geoffrey and their heirs 
once a day (semel) for ever. Be it known that Geoffrey and his heirs 



20 Henry II L (1235-36). 57 

shall have the said rent and ** precaria '* the first year of this fine, 
and Adam and his heirs the second year and so from year to year each 
in turns for ever. 

(120) At Schirbum, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Ralph de Tyderleng, complainant, and Richard de Mucegros and Grecia 
his wife, impedients, of half a virgate of land in Tiderleng. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Richard and Grecia 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Ralph, as that which he had 
by their gift. To have and to hold to Ralph and his heirs from Richard 
and Grecia and the heirs of Grecia for ever. Rendering therefor yearly 
one pair of gloves or one penny at Michaelmas for all, save foreign, 
service as much as belongs to the said land. Richard and Grecia and 
the heirs of Grecia will warrant the land to Ralph and his heirs by the 
aforesaid service against all men for ever. For this Ralph gave to 
Richard and Grecia three marcs of silver. 

(121) At Shyreburn, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Matilda and Christina daughters of Harding, plaintiff, and Henry de 
Haddon, tenent, of three parts of one hide of land in Candel. Matilda 
and Christina remitted and quit claimed for themselves and their heirs 
to Henry and his heirs all their right and claim in the land, for ever. 
For this Henry gave to Matilda and Christina two marcs of silver. 

(122) At Ivelcestre, Saturday next after the feast of St. Luke, between 
William son of William son of Adam, complainant, and Thomas Briton 
and Alice his wife, impedients, of half a hide of land in Tarente. Plea 
of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Thomas and Alice 
acknowledged the land to be the right of William as that which he had 
by their gift. To have and to hold to William and his heirs from 
Thomas and Alice and the heirs of Alice for ever. Rendering therefor 
yearly one pair of gloves or one penny at Easter for all, save foreign, 
service, as much as belongs to the said land. Thomas and Alice and 
the heirs of Alice will warrant the land to William and his heirs by the 
said service against all people for ever. For this William gave to 
Thomas and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

(123) At Schirburn, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
William de Vergelay, plaintiff, and Henry son of Walter, tenent, of half 
a hyde of land and a moiety of one messuage in Thore. William ac- 
knowledged the same to be the right of Henry. For this Henry granted 
the moiety to William. To have and to hold to William and his heirs 
from the chief lords of that fee, doing therefor the service which be- 
longs to such moiety. Moreover Henry gave to William one hundred 
shillings sterling. 

(124) At Schirburn, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Richard son of Robert, complainant, and Thomas Briton and Alice his 



58 Dorset Fines, 



wife, impedients, of half a virgate of land in Blaneford. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Thomas and Alice 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Richard as that which he had 
by their gift. To have and to hold to Richard and his heirs from 
Thomas and Alice and the heirs of Alice for ever. Rendering therefor 
yearly half a pound of pepper at Michaelmas for all service and exaction. 
Thomas and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant the land to Richard 
and his heirs by the said service against all people. For this Richard 
gave to Thomas and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

(125) At Schirbum, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Michael, Abbot of Glaston, complainant, and Alured de Lincoln, defor- 
ciant, of customs and services which the Abbot exacts from Alured in 
respect of the free tenement he holds from the Abbot in Acford and 
whereof the Abbot exacts from him that he should give to him yearly 
three shillings and do suit at his hundred of Niweton. Which customs 
and services Alured did not acknowledge to the Abbot. Alured granted 
for himself aud his heirs that he would render every year to the Abbot 
and his successors and his church of Glaston for the said tenement 
three shillings to be received at Niweton at two terms, namely one 
moiety at Hokeday, and the other moiety at Martinmas, and that he 
and his heirs or his bailiffs and his men of Acford twice a year should 
do suit at the hundred of the Abbot at Niweton, namely at Hokeday 
and Martinmas, and at the Inquisition (or inquiry) (efforciamentum) of 
the Court when a thief is there to be sentenced (adjudicandus fuerit) or 
when any plea shall be there, which cannot be determined without such 
Inquisition (or inquiry). For this the Abbot granted for himself and 
his successors that Alured and his heirs should have a tumbrel (cucking 
stool) (tumberellum) in his manor of Acford without hindrance of the 
Abbot or his successors for ever. 

(126) At Schirburn, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Robert Graffard, plaintiff, and Walkelin de Benham, tenent, of one 
ferling of land in Dichenestone. Assize of mort ancestor was sum- 
moned between them. Robert acknowledged the land to be the right 
of Walkelin. For this Walkelin granted to Robert four acres of the 
said land, namely one acre which lies at Walecumbe, one acre above 
Aldehulle, one acre in Langcumbe, and one acre near Siwardesholt. 
To have and to hold to Robert and his heirs from Walkelin and his 
heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly six pence at two terms, one 
moiety at Michaelmas, the other moiety at Easter, for all, save foreign, 
service, as much as belongs to the said land. 

(127) At Schirburn, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Philip son of William, plaintiff, and Roger, Abbot of Ford, tenent, of 
the manor of Thorncumbe. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned 



20 Henry III. (1235-36). 59 

between them. Philip acknowledged the manor to be the right of the 
Abbot and his church of Ford as that which the Abbot had by gift from 
William son of Ralph the father of plaintiff, whose heir Philip is. To 
have and to hold to the Abbot and his successors and his church of 
Ford from Philip and his heirs in free and perpetual alms for ever. 
Rendering therefor yearly one pound of pepper at Easter for all, save 
foreign, service, as much as belongs to the said manor. Philip and his 
heirs will warrant the manor to the Abbot and his successors and his 
church of Ford as his fee and perpetual alms by the service aforesaid 
against all people for ever. For this the Abbot gave to Philip three 
marcs of silver. 

(128) At Schirburn, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Walter de Strodde, plaintiff, and Simon de Percy, tenent, of half a 
virgate of land and two shillings of rent in Adeton. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Walter remitted and quit 
claimed for himself and his heirs to Simon and his heirs all his right 
and claim in the said land and rent for ever. For this Simon gave to 
Walter five marcs of silver. 

(129) At Schirburn, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
William de Vergelay, plaintiff, and Thomas de Langedon, tenent, of 
one virgate of land in Langedon. William remitted and quit claimed 
for himself and his heirs to Thomas and his heirs all his right and 
claim in the said land for ever. For this Thomas gave to William 
two marcs of silver. 

(130) At Schirburn, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Alice daughter of Roger, plaintiff, and Thomas Corbet and Matilda 
his wife, tenents, of forty two acres of land and two messuages in 
Phelippeston. Alice acknowledged the said land and messuages to 
be the right of Matilda. For this Thomas and Matilda granted to 
Alice two acres of land and one messuage, part of the above, namely 
one acre which lies near the land of Reginald son of Godiua (Godiva, 
Godina) towards the south, one acre between the land of Thomas son 
of Margareta and Reginald May, and one messuage which Edelina 
mother of Alice held. To have and to hold to Alice during her life 
from Thomas and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda, rendering there- 
for yearly four pence at Michaelmas for all service and exaction. After 
the decease of Alice the land and messuage shall revert to Thomas 
and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda for ever. 

(131) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Simon 
de Pilesdon, complainant, and Walter de Cume of the neifty of the 
said Walter. Simon acknowledged Walter to be a free man, and for 
himself and his heirs remitted and quit claimed Walter with all his 
sequels from every sort of neifty and servitude for ever (C tota sequela 



6o Dorset Fines, 



sua ab omnimoda nativitate et servitude imperpetuum). For this 
Walter gave to Simon half a marc of silver. 

(132) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St Martin, between Peter 
Blundus and Agatha his wife, complainants, and William de Leghe, 
impedient, of one and a half hide of land in Pikyate. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. William acknowledged the 
land to be the right of Peter and Agatha as that which they had by his 
gift. To have and to hold to them and their heirs from William and 
his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of gilt spurs or six 
pence at Easter for all, save foreign, service, as much as belongs to 
that land. William and his heirs will warrant to Peter and Agatha 
and their heirs the said land by the said service against all people for 
ever. For this Peter and Agatha remitted and quit claimed for them- 
selves to William and his heirs all the right and claim which they 
had in the land which was of Richard de Legh formerly husband of 
Agatha, in Athelinton and Legh in name of dower of Agatha for ever. 
Moreover Peter and Agatha gave to William nine marcs of silver. 

\EndorsedI\ 
Simon de Pilesdon puts in his claim in respect of ten shillings of 
rent which he says he ought to have. 

(133) At Schirburn, Thursday next after the feast of St. Katherine, 
between Robert de Bonevill, plaintiff, and Avicia who was the wife of 
John de Bonevill, tenent, of two parts of one virgate of land in Cinch- 
teton. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Avicia 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Robert. For this Robert 
granted it to Avicia. To have and to hold to Avicia during her life 
from Robert and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly forty pence at 
two terms, namely one moiety at Easter, the other moiety at Michael- 
mas for all, save foreign, service, as much as belongs to the said land. 
After the death of Avicia, the land shall revert to Robert and his heirs 
quit, for ever. 

(134) At Schirburn, Tuesday next after the feast of St. Katherine, 
between Richard Sereine and Agnes his wife, plaintiffs, and Hugh the 
chaplain, tenent, of one fourth part of an acre of land in Bridiport. 
Richard and Agnes remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the 
heirs of Agnes to Hugh and his heirs all their right and claim in the 
said land for ever. For this Hugh gave to Richard and Agnes ten 
shillings sterling. 

(135) At Schirburn, Tuesday next after the feast of St. Martin, 
between Henry, Abbot of Schirburn, complainant, and William son of 
Robert, impedient, of half a hide and four acres of land in Cumpton. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. William 
acknowledged the land to be the right of the Abbot and his church of 



20 Henry III. (1235-36). 6t 

Schirbum as that which he had by the gift of William. To have and 
to hold to the Abbot and his successors and his church of Schirburn in 
free, pure and perpetual alms for ever. The Abbot received William 
and his heirs into all benefices and orisons which henceforth should be 
done in his church of Schirburn for ever. 

(136) At Schirbum, in the octaves of St. Martin, between William 
de Porwikes and Juliana his wife, plaintiffs, and Eudo Martel and 
Margery his wife, tenents, of one virgate and two acres of land in 
Mapelderton. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. 
William and Juliana remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the 
heirs of Juliana to Eudo and Margery and the heirs of Margery all the 
right and claim they had in the said land for ever. For this Eudo 
and Margery gave to William and Juliana seven marcs of silver. 

(137) At Wilton, fifteen days after Easter day, between Osbert 
Giffard, complainant, and Reginald de Moyun, impedient, of the manor 
of Winterburn Fercles, except the advowson of the church, and of 
twenty seven acres of meadow in Acford Eschelling. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Reginald acknowledged the 
manor and meadow, except the advowson, to be the right of Osbert 
as that which he had by the gift of Reginald. To have and to hold 
to Osbert and his heirs from Reginald and his heirs for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly fourteen pounds and ten shillings at two terms, namely, 
one moiety in the quinzaine (quindena) of Michaelmas, the other moiety 
in the quinzaine of Easter, doing therefor the service of two knights for 
all service and exaction. Reginald and his heirs will warrant to Osbert 
and his heirs the whole manor and meadow, except the advowson by 
the said service against all people for ever. For this Osbert gave to 
Reginald one sore sparrow hawk. 

(138) At Wilton, Tuesday next after the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Elyas de la Mare, complainant, and William de 
Arundel and Agnes his wife, impedients, of half a carucate of land in 
Tarente Gundevill. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between 
them. William and Agnes acknowledged the land to be the right 
of Elyas, as that which he had by their gift. To have and to hold 
to Elyas and his heirs from William and Agnes and the heirs of Agnes 
for ever, rendering therefor yearly one marc of silver at Michaelmas 
for all save foreign, service, as much as belongs to the said land. 
William and Agnes and the heirs of Agnes will warrant to Elyas and 
his heirs all the said land by the said service against all people for 
ever. For this Elyas gave to William and Agnes one sore sparrow 
hawk. 

(139) At Wilton, fifteen days after Easter day, between David 
son of William, plaintiff, and Walter Coppe, tenent, of one virgate of 



62 Dorset Fines, 



land in Gessich Gentil. Walter acknowledged the same to be the 
right of David. For this David granted it to Walter. To have and 
to hold to Walter and his heirs from David and his heirs for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly six shillings at four terms, namely at Nativity 
of St. John Baptist eighteen pence, Michaelmas eighteen pence, 
Christmas eighteen pence, and Easter eighteen pence, for all, save 
foreign, service, as much as belongs to the said land. This concord 
was made there being present Robert le Gentil chief lord of that fee, 
from whom Walter held that land, agreeing thereto, saving to Robert 
and his heirs a rent of one pair of gloves or one penny at Easter for all 
service and exaction, to be received at (or by) the hand of Walter and 
his heirs (" recipiend p manu ipius Walto," etc.). 

(140) At Wilton, fifteen days after Easter day, between Matilda 
de LahuU, plaintiff, and Germ us (? Gerinus, or Gerivus) de Merswude 
and Helwysia his wife, tenents, of one carucate of land in Merswude. 
Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Matilda 
remitted and quit claimed for herself and her heirs to Germus and 
Helewysia and the heirs of Helewysia all her right and claim in the 
said land for ever. For this Germus and Helwysia gave to Matilda 
nine and a half marcs of silver. 

(141) At 3chirburn, on St. Andrew's day, between Thomas de 
Bekeford and Margery his wife, plaintiffs, and Adam le Jofhe, tenent, 
of two parts of one virgate of land in Lylande. And between the 
said plaintiffs and the said Adam, whom Claricia, who was the wife of 
Adam Kneyt, called to warrant and who warranted to her a third part 
of one virgate of land in the said vill. Recognizance of the great 
assize was summoned between them. Adam acknowledged all the 
said land to be the right of Margery. For this Thomas and Margery 
granted it to Adam. To have and to hold to Adam and his heirs from 
Thomas and Margery and the heirs of Margery for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly four shillings and one pound of pepper at two terms, 
namely two shillings and one pound of pepper at Easter, and two 
shillings at Michaelmas for all, save foreign service, as much as 
belongs to the said land. And Thomas and Margery and the heirs 
of Margery will warrant to Adam and his heirs all the said land and 
will acquit and defend him, against the chief lords of that fee, of all 
other services to the said land pertaining, by the service aforesaid for 
ever. 

(142) At Schirbum, on St. Andrew's day, between John de Dun, 
plaintiff, and William de Luston, tenent, of half a hide of land in 
Luston. Recognizance of the great assize was summoned between 
them. William acknowledged the land to be the right of John, and 
rendered it to him at the Court, and remitted and quit claimed for him- 



20 Henry II L (1235-36). 63 

self and his heirs to John and his heirs for ever. For this John gave 
and granted to William one virgate of land in Luston which John 
held on the day this concord was made. To have and to hold to 
William and his heirs from John and his heirs for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly four shillings and four pence half penny at two terms, 
namely, one moiety at the Purification of the Blessed Mary, the other 
moiety at the feast of St. Peter ad Vincula, for all, save foreign, 
service, as much as belongs to the said land. 

(143) At Schirbum, on the morrow of St. Andrew, between Roger, 
Master of the Hospital of St. Mary Magdalen of Alington, plaintiff, 
and Robert, Abbot of Binedon, tenent, of half a virgate of land in 
Modberg. The Master remitted and quit claimed for himself and his 
brethren of the said Hospital, to the Abbot and his successors and his 
church of Binedon all the right and claim he had in the said land for 
ever. For this the Abbot gave to the Master one hundred shillings 
sterling. 

(144) At Schirbum, on the morrow of St. Andrew, between Alice 
daughter of Fromund, plaintiff, and Adam Carpentar and Eufemia his 
wife, tenent s, of one messuage in Wymburn. Assize of mort ancestor 
was summoned between them. Alice remitted and quit claimed for 
herself and her heirs to Adam and Eufemia and the heirs of Eufemia, 
all her right and claim in the said messuage. For this Adam and 
Eufemia gave Alice two marcs of silver. 

(145) At Schirbum, on the morrow of St. Andrew, between William 
Abbot of Middelton, complainant, by Gilbert the clerk in his place, 
and Bartholomew Ruffus of his neifty. The abbot acknowledged Bar- 
tholomew to be a free man and remitted and quit claimed, for him- 
self and his successors and his church of Middelton, the said Bar- 
tholomew with all his sequels from every sort of neifty and servitude 
for ever. For this Bartholomew gave to the Abbot five marcs of 
silver. 

(146) At Schirbum, on St. Andrew's day, between Matilda, who 
was the wife of Jordan de Sermunvill, plaintiff, and Thomas de Cruket 
and Joan his wife, tenents, of a moiety of one knight's fee in Waudich, 
which moiety Matilda claims in dower as of the free hold which was 
of Jordan formerly her husband in the said vill. Matilda remitted and 
quit claimed for herself to Thomas and Joan and the heirs of Joan, 
all her right and claim in the said moiety for ever. For this Thomas 
and Joan gave to Matilda six marcs of silver. 

(147) At Schirbum, on the morrow of the close of Easter, between 
Simon son of John, plaintiff, and John Stefne, tenent, of one virgate of 
land in Wymburneminstre. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. Simon remitted and quit claimed for himself and his 



64 Dorset Fines, 



heirs to John and his heirs all his right and claim in the said land for 
ever. For this John gave to Simon four marcs of silver. 

(148) At Schirburn, Wednesday next after the feast of St. Katherine, 
between Simon de Sifrewast and Joan his wife, plaintiffs, and William 
de Grenges and Philippa his wife, tenents, of one hide of land in 
Kenteleswurth. William and Philippa acknowledged the land to be 
the right of Joan. For this Simon and Joan granted it to William 
and Philippa. To have and to hold to William and Philippa during 
the life of either of them (utriusque eorum, for the life of the longer 
liver ?) from Simon and Joan and the heirs of Joan, rendering therefor 
yearly during Philippa's life one pair of gloves or one penny at Easter. 
After Philippa's death William, if he survives, shall render during his 
life for the said land ten shillings at two terms namely, one moiety at 
Christmas, and the other moiety at the feast of St. John Baptist for all, 
save foreign, service, as much as belongs to the said land. After the 
death of William and Philippa the land shall revert to Simon and 
Joan and the heirs of Joan, quit, for ever. 

(149) At Schirburn, Thursday next after the feast of St. Katherine, 
between Stephen de Edmodesham, complainant, and John de Baiocis, 
deforciant, oi common ol pasture in Stanrigge, whereof Stephen com- 
plains that John does not allow him to have his pasture, namely from 
the ditch which is called '&lt; la rime " ascending as far as the cross (ad 
crucem) of Stanrigge, and so from the cross of Stanrigge as far as the 
hedge of Roger de Bosco descending towards the east. Stephen 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs, to John and his 
heirs, all his right and claim in the said pasture for ever. For this 
John gave to Stephen two and a half marcs of silver. 

(150) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Eudo de 
Stokes and Felicia his wife, plaintiffs, and Alice daughter of William, 
tenent, of one messuage in Stokes. Assize of mort ancestor was 
summoned between them. Alice acknowledged the messuage to be 
the right of Felicia. For this Eudo and Felicia granted to Alice the 
said messuage. To have and to hold to Alice during her life, from 
Eudo and Felicia and the heirs of Felicia, doing therefor as much 
foreign service as belongs to the said messuage, for all service and 
exaction. After the decease of Alice the messuage shall revert to Eudo 
and Felicia and the heirs of Felicia for ever. 

(151) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Thomas 
de Vancell, plaintiff, and Roger son of Pagan, tenent, of three virgates, 
except twelve acres, of land in Wurth. Thomas remitted and quit 
claimed for himself and his heirs to Roger and his heirs all his right 
and claim in the said land for ever. For this Roger gave to Thomas 
forty shillings sterling. 



20 Henry III. (1235-36). 65 



(152) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Ralph 
de Stures and Helena his wife, plaintiffs, and Joan who was the wife 
of William de Roudon, tenent, of one canicate of land in Childocford. 
Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Ralph and 
Helena remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of 
Helena to Joan and her heirs all their right and claim in the said land 
for ever. For this Joan gave to Ralph and Helena four marcs of 
silver. 

(153) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Peter de 
Horton and Isabella his wife, John de Campeny and Matilda his wife, 
plaintiffs, by Peter and John in the places of Isabella and Matilda, 
and Robert, Abbot of Teokesbir, tenent, of half a hide of land in 
Wynbume. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. 
The plaintiffs remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the heirs 
of Isabella and Matilda to the Abbot and his successors and his church 
of Teokesbir all their right and claim in the said land for ever, saving 
to Albreda who was the wife of Giles de Craneburn, one third part of 
the said half hide of land, to hold during her life in name of dower and 
which third part after the decease of Albreda shall revert to the Abbot 
and his successors quit, for ever. For this the abbot gave to Peter 
and Isabella, John and Matilda thirteen marcs of silver. 

(154) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between John 
Salbe, plaintiff, and Henry de Tolre, tenent, of half a hide and half a 
virgate of land in Tolre. John remitted and quit claimed for himself and 
his heirs to Henry and his heirs all his right and claim in the said 
land for ever. For this Henry gave to John eight marcs. 

(155) At Schirburn, on St. Andrew's day, between Alice daughter 
of Philip, plaintiff, and William Paridel, tenent, of ten and a half 
acres of land in Melebir. Recognizance of the great assize was 
summoned between them. Alice acknowledged the land to be the 
right of William. For this William granted to Alice five acres and 
one messuage of the said land, namely : five acres which lie in the croft 
below the garden of Walter de Melebir towards the south and one 
messuage which Cristiana sister of William held. To have and to hold 
to Alice during her life from William and his heirs, rendering therefor 
yearly six pence at Easter for all, save foreign, service, as much as 
belongs to the said land and messuage. After the death of Alice the 
land and messuage shall revert to William and his heirs, quit, for ever. 

(156) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between John de 
Wurth, plaintiff, and William de Bingham and Cecilia his wife, 
tenents, of one virgate of land in Worth. Assize of mort ancestor 
was summoned between them. John remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs to William and Cecilia and the heirs of Cecilia 

5 



66 Dorset Fines. 



all his right and claim in the said land for ever. For this William 
and Cecilia gave to John one sore sparrow hawk. 

(157) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between John 
Lancelev6e, plaintiff, and Henry de Luditon, tenent, of one hide of land 
in Ludeton. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. 
John acknowledged the land to be the right of Henry. For this Henry 
granted it to John. To have and to hold to John and his heirs from 
Henry and his heirs for ever. Rendering therefor yearly one pair of 
gilt spurs at Easter for all, save foreign, service, as much as belongs 
to the said land. Moreover John gave to Henry sixty shillings 
sterling. 

(158) At Schireburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Philip 
son of Martin, plaintiff, and Ralph Pistor and Ysabella his wife, tenents 
of one messuage in Wymburn Mistre. Ralph and Ysabella ac- 
knowledged the messuage to be the right of Philip. For this Philip 
granted it to Ralph and Ysabella. To have and to hold to Ralph and 
Ysabella and the heirs of Ysabella from Philip and his heirs for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one pound of cumin at Michaelmas for all 
service and exaction. If Ysabella should die without heir of her body 
begotten the messuage shall revert to Philip and his heirs quit, for ever. 
Moreover Ralph and Ysabella gave to Philip one marc of silver. 

(159) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Peter 
son of William, plaintiff, and Gregory Gascun, tenent, of one messuage 
and half a virgate of land in Blaneford. Assize of mort ancestor was 
summoned between them. Peter acknowledged the messuage and 
land to be the right of Gregory. For this Gregory granted the same 
to Peter. To have and to hold to Peter and- his heirs from Gregory 
and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly two shillings and half 
a pound of pepper at two terms, namely twelve pence and half a pound 
of pepper at Easter and twelve pence at Michaelmas for all service 
and exaction. 

(160) At Schirburn, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Reginald 
Loke, plaintiff, and Robert, Abbot of Binedon, tenent, of two 
messuages in Dorcestre and of one virgate of land in Winfrod. Assize 
of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Reginald remitted 
and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to the Abbot and his suc- 
cessors and his church of Binedon all his right and claim in the land 
and messuages for ever. For this the Abbot gave to Reginald one 
marc of silver. 

21 Henry III. (1236-37). 

(161) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 



21 Henry III. (1236-37). 67 



between John de Baiocis, complainant, and ^ . . . Bishop and Chapter 
of Salisbury, deforciants, by Ralph de Hagh in their place, of the 
advowson of the church of Waye. Assize of darrein presentment was 
summoned between them. John acknowledged the advowson to be 
the right of the Bishop and Chapter and their church of Salisbury, as 
that which they had by gift from Alan de Baiocis, father of John, 
whose heir he is. The Bishop and Chapter granted for themselves 
and their successors to John that whenever during his life the church 
(living) is vacant he shall have the first presentation, provided that 
whoever shall be for the time parson of the said church by the presen- 
tation of John, shall every year render to the Bishop and Chapter six 
marcs of silver from the said church, at Salisbury by name of ^ . . . 
at four terms twenty shillings. After the death of John the said 
advowson shall remain to the Bishop and Chapter of Salisbury and 
their successors quit of the heirs of John for ever. Moreover the 
Bishop and Chapter granted for themselves and their successors that 
henceforth they shall provide a chaplain to celebrate (divine service) 
ever&gt;' day in the year in the chapel of St. John situated within the 
parish of Waye, for the souls of the said John, his heirs, his ancestors 
and all the faithful for ever, and shall also provide sufficient ornaments, 
books and lights in the said chapel for ever. 

(162) At Westminster, in the octaves of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Robert son of Hugh de Kenncheye, plaintiff, 
and William, Abbot of Cerne, deforciant, by Wymund de Cerne, clerk, 
in the Abbot's place, of two virgates of land in Symundesberg. Robert 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to the Abbot and 
his successors and his church of Cerne all his right and claim in the 
said land for ever. For this the Abbot gave to Robert ten marcs of 
silver. 

(163) At Westminster, in the octaves of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Nicholas, Prior of Christ's church, complainant, 
by John de Auna his canon in his place, and Eudo Martel, deforciant, 
of a yearly rent of one hundred and three shillings, whereof the Prior 
complained that there were arrears due to him of fifty one shillings 
and six pence. Eudo acknowledged and granted for himself and his 
heirs that he ought to pay (** recognovit se debere ") to the Prior and his 
successors and his church the said yearly rent for ever, and will 
render the same to the Prior and his successors and his church by the 
hand of the bailiffs of him and of his heirs at Hineton every year at 
two terms, namely one moiety at Hokedey and the other moiety in the 
octaves of St. Michael. If they make default, the Prior and his 

^ Part of document torn off, but the Bishop of Salisbury at this date was Robert 
de Bingham. 



68 Dorset Fines. 



successors and his church may distrain Eudo and his heirs by their 
chattels found in the manor of Hineton until full payment of such 
rent. The Prior received Eudo and his heirs into all benefices and 
orisons which henceforth should be done in his church for ever. 
Moreover Eudo gave to the Prior one hundred and three shillings for 
arrears of the said yearly rent. 

(164) At Westminster, on the morrow of All Souls, between Walter 
Flambard, plaintiff, and Richard de Wrotham, tenent, of one hide of 
land in Haselber. Walter remitted and quit claimed for himself and 
his heirs to Richard and his heirs all his right and claim in the said 
land for ever. For this Richard gave to Walter ten marcs of silver. 

(165) At Westminster, in the octaves of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Simon de Siffrewast and Joan his wife, plain- 
tiffs, by Simon himself in Joan's place, and John, Abbot of Forde, 
tenent, of ten acres of land in Emele. Simon and Joan remitted and 
quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of Joan to the Abbot and his 
successors all their right and claim in the said land for ever. For this 
the Abbot gave to Simon and Joan six marcs of silver. 

(166) At Westminster, three weeks after Holy Trinity, between 
John, Abbot of Forda, complainant, by Jerman de Kingesland 
in his place, and Alured de Lincoln, impedient, of the manor of 
Turnewurth. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
Alured acknowledged the manor to be the right of the Abbot and his 
church of Ford. To have and to hold to the Abbot and his successors 
and his church aforesaid without any retainment in free and perpetual 
alms for ever. Alured and his heirs will warrant to the Abbot and his 
successors and his church the said manor, and will acquit him in 
respect of scutage whenever it shall befall, as his free and perpetual 
alms, against all men for ever. The Abbot received Alured and his 
heirs into all benefices and orisons which henceforth shall be done 
in his church of Ford for ever. Be it known that the Abbot granted 
for himself and his successors that he will acquit the whole manor 
in respect of suits of the hundreds and county which belong to the 
said manor. 

(167) At Westminster, on the morrow of All Souls, between Roger 
de Woth and Cecilia his wife, plaintiffs, and Ralph le Waleys, tenent, 
of a fourth part of one knight's fee in Podinton, except forty acres of 
pasture and two acres of meadow. Roger and Cecilia acknowledged 
the same to be the right of Ralph. For this Ralph at the petition of 
Roger and Cecilia granted to John de Strode the said fourth part, except 
as abovesaid. To have and to hold to John and his heirs from Ralph 
and his heirs, for ever, doing therefor as much foreign service as belongs 
to a fourth part of a Knight's fee, excepting the forty ac. of pasture 



23 Henry III. (1238-39). 69 

and two ac. of meadow, for all service and exaction. Ralph and 
his heirs will warrant the same to John and his heirs by the said service 
against all people for ever. Moreover John gave to Ralph ten marcs of 
silver. 

22 Henry III. (1237-38). 

(168) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, 
between Thomas Briton, complainant, by William son of Adam in his 
place, and Ralph Maskerel, impedient, of one carucate of land in Parva 
Kynton. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
Ralph acknowledged the land to be the right of Thomas as that which 
he had by Ralph's gift. To have and to hold to Thomas and his heirs 
from Ralph and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair 
of white gloves or one penny at Easter for all, save foreign, service. 
Ralph and his heirs will warrant to Thomas and his heirs the said land 
by the said service against all people for ever. For this Thomas gave 
to Ralph one sore sparrow hawk. 

(169) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Ralph Maskerl, complainant, and Thomas le Briton and Alice his wife, 
impedients, of one carucate of land in Modestan. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned between them% Thomas and Alice acknowledged 
the land to be the right of Ralph as that which he had by their gift. 
To have and to hold to Ralph and his heirs from Thomas and Alice 
and the heirs of Alice for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of 
white gloves or one penny at Easter, and doing as much foreign 
service as belongs to that land for all service and exaction. Thomas 
and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant to Ralph and his heirs 
all the said land by the said service against all people for ever. For 
this Ralph gave to Thomas and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

23 Henry III. (1238-39). 

(170) At St. Bridgets, London, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, 
between Margery who was the wife of John le Venur, plaintiff, and 
Hamo son of Richard, tenent, of a third part of one croft in Saftesbir. 
And between the said Margery, plaintiff, and the said Hamo, whom 
Adam Kenepe called to warrant and who warranted him, of a third part 
of four shillings of rent and of one croft in the same vill, which third 
part Margery claims in dower as of the free hold of John formerly her 
husband. Margery remitted and quit claimed for herself to Hamo and 
Adam and their heirs all her right and claim in the said third part of a 
croft and rent by name of dower for ever. For this Hamo and Adam 
gave to Margery one marc of silver. 



yo Dorset Fines. 



(171) At St. Bridgets, London, fifteen days after Easter day, be- 
tween Nicolas, Prior of Christ's church, complainant, by Brother John 
de Auna, his canon in his place, and Eudo Martel, impedient, by 
William de Knuc in his place. Inasmuch as the Prior complained that 
Eudo did not acquit him of the services which William Lungespeye 
exacted from him in respect of one virgate of land which he holds from 
Eudo in Caneford whereof Eudo who is the mesne ought to acquit him 
as it is said. Eudo acknowledged the said virgate to be the right of 
the Prior and his church of Christ ('s church) as that which he had by 
the gift of Eudo Martel, father of Eudo, whose heir he is. To have and 
to hold to the Prior and his successors and his church from Eudo and 
his heirs in free pure and perpetual alms. Eudo and his heirs will 
warrant acquit and defend to the same Prior and his successors and his 
church the said virgate of land as free pure and perpetual alms against 
all people for ever. The Prior received Eudo and his heirs into all 
benefices and orisons which henceforth should be done in his church of 
Christ's church for ever. 

(172) At St. Bridget's, London, one month after Holy Trinity, 
between Nicholas de Winterburn, complainant, and Thomas Briton 
and Alice his wife, impedients, of a third part of two carucates of 
land in Bradeford. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned be- 
tween them. Thomas and Alice acknowledged the same to be the 
right of Nicholas as that which he had by their gift. To have and to 
hold to Nicholas and his heirs from Thomas and Alice and the heirs of 
Alice for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of gloves or one penny 
at Easter, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Thomas 
and Alice and the heirs of Alice the service which to the said third part 
belongs, for all service and exaction. Thomas and Alice and the heirs 
of Alice will warrant to Nicholas and his heirs the said third part of 
two carucates of land by the said service against all men for ever. For 
this Nicholas gave to Thomas and Alice eighty marcs of silver. 

25 Henry IIL (1240-41). 

(173) At Wilton, one month after Holy Trinity, between Ranulph 
de Cerna, complainant, and Nicholas de Caundel, impedient, of 
two and a half hides of land in Purscaundel and Meleburn. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Nicholas acknow- 
ledged the land to be the right of Ranulph as that which he had by his 
gift. To have and to hold to Ranulph and his heirs from Nicholas and 
his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly two shillings sterling at 
Michaelmas at Caundel and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee 
all other services which to that land belong, for all service, suit and 



26 Henry III. (1240-42). 71 

exaction. Nicholas and his heirs will warrant to Ranulph and his 
heirs all the said land as is aforesaid by the said service against all 
people for ever. For this Ranulphus gave to Nicholas twenty marcs of 
silver. 



26 Henry III. (1240-42). 

(174) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 
Geoffrey de Maundevill, complainant, and Joscelin Bishop of Bath, 
and the Dean and Chapter of the Church of Wells, and Robert, Bishop 
of Salisbury and the Dean and Chapter of that church, deforciants, by 
Robert de Marisco in the place of the Bishop of Bath and Dean and 
Chapter of Wells, and John le Messager in the place of the Bishop of 
Salisbury, and John Anestayse in the place of the Dean and Chapter of 
Salisbury, of the advowson of the church of Whytchyrch. Assize of 
darrein presentment was summoned between them. Geoffrey acknow- 
ledged the advowson to be the right of the said Bishops and Deans and 
Chapters and remitted and quit claimed it for himself and his heirs to 
them and their successors and their churches for ever, so that the advow- 
son of the vicarage of the church of Whytchyrche may remain to the 
Bishop of Bath and his successors for ever. The Bishops, Deans and 
Chapters received Geoffrey and his heirs into all benefices and orisons 
which henceforth should be done in their churches for ever. 

(175) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Essex and Hertford, complainant, by 
Walter de Auenebyr in his place, and John de Port, deforciant, of 
two carucates of land in Thorenton. Plea of covenant was summoned 
between them. John acknowledged the said land to be the right of 
the Earl and remitted and quit claimed it for himself and his heirs to the 
Earl and his heirs for ever, except one virgate of the said land which 
John before had by gift of William le Port his brother, and which 
remains to John by this fine. For this the Earl granted to John that 
virgate. To have and to hold to John during his life from the Earl 
and his heirs by the service which to that virgate belongs, for all 
8er\'ice and exaction. After the death of John the said virgate shall 
revert to the Earl and his heirs quit, for ever. 

(176) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between 
Lancelinus de Stokes and Avicia his wife, plaintiffs, and Thomas 
Briton, tenant, of a third part of one carucate of land in Stokes, which 
the plaintiffs claimed to be the dower of Avicia as of the free hold 
of William Marescall once her husband in the said vill. Lancelinus 
and Avicia remitted and quit claimed for themselves to Thomas and 
his heirs all their right and claim in the said third part by name of 



72 Dorset Fines, 



dower for ever. For this Thomas gave to Lancelinus and Avicia six 
marcs of silver. 

27 Henry HI. (1242-43). 

(177) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Robert, Abbot of Bynedon, plaintiff^ by Brother Thomas Batayl in his 
place, and Philip Hareng, impedient, of two carucates of land in 
Chaluedon Hareng. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between 
them. Philip acknowledged the land to be the right of the Abbot and 
his church, as that which the Abbot and his church had by his gift, 
as in demesnes homages ^ . . . vileinages meadows and pastures, 
wards, reliefs and escheats, liberties and free customs and all other 
things to that land, pertaining as wholly as ^ . . . before held it without 
any retainment. To have and to hold to the abbot and his successors 
and his church from the chief lords of that fee in free and perpetual 
alms, doing therefor all services which to that land pertain. Philip and 
his heirs will warrant to the Abbot and his successors and his church 
the said land is his free and perpetual alms by the said services against 
all men for ever. Moreover Philip granted for himself and his heirs 
that if any tenement should in future come to him or his heirs by 
right of inheritance in the said vill, that tenement shall remain to the 
Abbot and his successors and his church quit from Philip and his heirs 
for ever. For this the Abbot gave and granted to Philip two carucates 
of land in Wynterburn Beuchamp, namely all the land which the Abbot 
before held in that vill as in demesnes, homages and services of free 
men, vileinages, meadows and pastures, wards, reliefs and escheats, 
liberties and free customs and all other things to that land pertaining, 
as wholly as the said Abbot before held it To have and to hold to Philip 
and his heirs from the Abbot and his successors and his church for 
ever. Rendering therefor yearly one pound of wax at Michaelmas 
within the Abbey of Bynedon, doing therefor to the chief lords of that 
fee for the Abbot and his successors and his church all other services 
which to that land pertain. Neither the Abbot ncr his successors may 
have or exact any relief or custody from the said land from any heir 
of Philip, nor marriage, for ever. The Abbot and his successors will 
warrant to Philip and his heirs the said land by the said service against 
all men for ever. 

28 Henry HI. (1243-44). 

(178) At Syrebum, in the octaves of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist. Between Geoffrey de Maundevill, complainant, and John de 

^ Part of the document torn off.. 



28 Henry II L (1243-44). T^ 

Bayocis and Matilda his wife, deforciants, by John le Rat in Matilda's 
place, of suits which Geoffrey exacts from them at his hundred of 
Witechurch, whereof Geoffrey exacts from them that they or their attorney 
shall follow the said hundred at three lawe days, namely on the morrows 
of St. Michael, Epiphany and Hokkeday and that the tithing of Lym of 
John and Matilda shall follow at the said three days, namely, each man 
of twelve years whether he holds land or not, so that if the tithingman 
should happen to be in the mercy of Geoffrey at any of the said three 
days, the whole tithing shall be in the mercy of Geoffrey, and shall 
come to the said hundred fifteen days after the day on which the tithing- 
man is amerced, he to hear his judgment thereupon ; and if any tithing- 
man of John and Matilda be attached for any plea which in that hundred 
ought to be determined, namely for bread or ale sold or made against 
the assize, or for any offence on account of which he ought to be 
attached the said man shall follow the said hundred from hundred to 
hundred until that plea shall be determined there, and that John and 
Matilda or their attorney and the said tithingman and all the other 
hundreds shall follow yearly ; and if any stranger shall come to the said 
tithing or any of that hundred when he shall have exceeded his twelfth 
year, they shall come to the said hundred and shall swear fealty to the 
King and they shall give one penny to the sergeant of the hundred. 
And that Geoffrey first shall buy his fish in the said land of Lim of 
John and Matilda, and he shall have thirteen pennyworths of fish for 
twelve pence, which suits John and Matilda did not recognize to him. 
John and Matilda for themselves and the heirs of Matilda have ac- 
knowledged to Geoffrey and his heirs that all the men of Geoffrey and 
Matilda holding land in Lym, who shall not be on the sea without 
hindrance shall come to the hundred of Geoffrey and his heirs at Wite- 
church at two lawe dayes yearly, namely, on the morrows of Hokkeday 
and Michaelmas. And if the tithingman of John and Matilda or the 
heirs of Matilda shall happen to be in the mercy of Geoffrey or his heirs 
for any offence in the said hundred, whereof John and Matilda or the 
heirs of Matilda are not able to have their court, as another free man of 
the said hundred should have, the tithingman with the whole tithing 
holding land shall be amerced in the said hundred according to the law 
of the land and gravity of the offence (quantitatem delicti), and when 
any one of the said tithing men born upon the land of John and Matilda 
or the heirs of Matilda shall come of age, he shall come to the said 
hundred and shall swear fealty to the King and shall be quit of the suit 
of the hundred until he shall hold land. So that meanwhile he may be 
in " frithborth ''. And if any of the said men of John and Matilda or 
the heirs of Matilda holding land shall be on the sea at any of the 
said lawe dayes of the hundred who shall have a plea upon himself, 



74 Dorset Fines. 



whereby John and Matilda or the heirs of Matilda are not able to have 
their court as any other free man of the same hundred, when he shall 
come to the land (literally, when he shall return from the sea to the 
land), he shall follow the said hundred of Witechurch from hundred to 
hundred as the hundred shall be held, until that plea there shall be 
determined. And if any prisoner shall be taken in the said land of Lym 
of John and Matilda or the heirs of Matilda he shall be led to the said 
hundred by the men of John and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda. And 
the said tithingman and bailiff of John and Matilda shall follow the 
said hundred from hundred to hundred until the said prisoner shall there 
have his judgment. And John and Matilda for themselves and the 
heirs of Matilda have granted as much as pertains to them that Geoffrey 
and his heirs may have reasonable achat of all things saleable in the 
said land and market of Lym for ever. Moreover John and Matilda 
and the heirs of Matilda shall give every year to Geoffrey and his heirs 
ten shillings sterling, to be taken at Lym, namely, at Easter and 
Michaelmas five shillings. For this Geoffrey for himself and his heirs 
released to John and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda all his right and 
claim in the residue of all the suits aforesaid at the said hundred for 
ever. And John and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda shall do homage 
to Geoffrey and his heirs in respect of the said suits at the said hundred 
of Witechurch and in respect of the said market of Lym as is aforesaid. 
Moreover John and Matilda gave to Geoffrey fifty-five marcs of silver. 

(179) At Schyrebum, in the octaves of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist, between the Abbot of Forde, complainant, and Adam Heyrum, 
impedient, of one knight's fee in Cernemue. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned between them. Adam acknowledged the fee to be the 
right of the Abbot and his church of Ford as that which he had by gift 
from Adam. To have and to hold to the Abbot and his successors and 
his church aforesaid from Adam and his heirs in free, pure and per- 
petual alms. And Adam and his heirs will warrant to the Abbot and 
his successors and his church the said fee as his pure and perpetual 
alms, free and quit from all secular service and exaction for ever. The 
Abbot granted for himself and his successors that henceforth he would 
render every year to Adam and Matilda his wife two and a half marcs 
of silver during Adam's life at two terms, namely, Michaelmas and 
Easter. Moreover the Abbot granted for himself and his successors 
that he will give to Adam and Matilda during Adam's life five corodies 
as in bread and ale, namely four corodies of monks and the fifth corody 
of one servant and also ten pence every week for the victuals ("conpona- 
gium")of the said five corodies, and likewise yearly five ells of good white 
woollen cloth and one pair of boots and one pair of stockings at Christ- 
mas. And moreover he will find for Adam and Matilda during the life 



28 Henry IIL (1243-44). 75 

of either a certain good dwelling-house (mansionem competentem) at 
Thorecumb with a curtilage, namely that which Elyas son of Ralph 
had in the said vill, which house the Abbot and his successors shall 
honorably sustain (in repair), and likewise find for Adam and Matilda 
litter and brush (literam et bustam) reasonably sufficient to be carried 
to the said house at Thorecumbe at their reasonable request at the cost 
of the Abbot and his successors, and likewise find every week three 
bushels of oats by the measure of the country and hay for one horse as 
for the palfrey of the Abbot (literally, as much hay for their horse as 
the Abbot has for his palfrey) and his successors and twelve pence 
every year at Easter to shoe his horse. If Adam died and Matilda 
survived, the Abbot and his successors shall render to Matilda during 
her life one marc of silver yearly, namely at Michaelmas and Easter ; 
and three corodies of monks as in bread and ale and six pence every 
week for the victuals of the said three corodies. If Matilda survived 
after Adam's death and wished to implead the Abbot or his successors 
for her dower in respect of the said fee she shall lose for ever one corody 
of monks and two pence of the said six pence. 

(180) 1 At Scyrbum, in the octaves of the Apostles Peter and 
Paul, between William de Monte Sorell, complainant, and Nicholas 
Baggh and Matilda his wife, impedients, of one messuage in Welles. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Nicholas and 
Matilda acknowledged the messuage to be the right of William as that 
which he had by their gift. To have and to hold to William and his 
heirs from Nicholas and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one pair of white gloves of the price of one 
penny or one penny at Easter, and doing therefor to the chief lords of 
that fee all other services which to that messuage belong. Nicholas 
and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda will warrant to William and his 
heirs the said messuage by the said service against all men for ever. 
For this William gave to Nicholas and Matilda one sore sparrow 
hawk. 

(181) At Schyrburn, on the morrow of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist, between William, Abbot of Middelton, complainant, and Adam 
Buchard and Lucia his wife, impedients, of one messuage and one 
ferling of land in Stoclaunde. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Adam and Lucia acknowledged the messuage and the 
said land to be the right of the Abbot and his church of Middelton as 
that which he had by their gift, and remitted and quit claimed for 
themselves and the heirs of Lucia to the Abbot and his successors and 
his church for ever. The Abbot received Adam and Lucia and the 

^ Really a Somersetshire Fine. 



76 Dorset Fines. 



heirs of Lucia into all benefices done and orisons which henceforth they 
should do in the said church for ever. 

(182) At Syrebum, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Robert de Bosco, plaintiff, and John de Cnoll and Cristiana his wife, 
tenents, of eight acres of land in Phelipeston. Recognizance of the 
great assize was summoned between them. John and Cristiana ac- 
knowledged the land to be the right of Robert and rendered it to him. 
And John remitted and quit claimed for himself and the heirs of 
Cristiana to Robert and his heirs for ever. 

(183) At Schyreburn, in the octaves of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist, between Walter le Bugle, plaintiff, and William, Abbot of 
Middelton, tenent, whom Robert le Bret called to warrant and who 
warranted to him two and a half virgates of land in Fifhyde. Walter 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to the Abbot and his 
successors all his right and claim in the said land for ever. For this 
the Abbot gave to Walter half a marc of silver. 

(184) At Schyreburn, in the octaves of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist, between William, son of Walter, plaintiff, and Richard Gode- 
tide, tenent, of one messuage and one virgate of land in Chumton. 
Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. William 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Richard and his 
heirs his right and claim in the said messuage and land for ever. For 
this Richard gave to William one sore sparrow hawk. 

(185) At Schyreburn, in the octaves of the Nativity of St. John the 
Baptist, between William de Tilly and Cristiana his wife and Claricia, 
Agnes, Isolda and Joan sisters of Cristiana, plaintiffs, and Andrew 
Peverel, tenent, of one virgate of land and one acre of meadow in 
Stourmistre. Assize of itiort ancestor was summoned between them  
William, Cristiana, Claricia, Agnes, Isolda and Joan remitted and quit 
claimed for themselves and the heirs of Cristiana, Claricia, Agnes, 
Isolda and Joan to Andrew and his heirs all their right and claim in 
the said land for ever. For this Andrew granted to them four marcs 
of silver. 

(186) At Schyreburn, in the octaves of the Nativity of St John 
Baptist, between the Abbot of Schyreburn, complainant, and John 
Ernys, chaplain, deforciant, of one virgate of land in Stapelbrug. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. John acknowledged the 
land to be the right of the Abbot and his church of Schyreburn. For 
this the Abbot granted it to John. To have and to hold to John during 
his life from the Abbot and his successors and his church, doing there- 
for all services which belong to the said land. After the decease of 
John the land wholly shall revert to the Abbot and his successors and 
his church quit from the heirs of John for ever. 



28 Henry II L (1243-44). "]"] 

(187) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist, between Henry Deverel, plaintiff, by Eustace Deverel in his 
place, and Henry son of Herbert, deforciant, by William son of John 
in his place, of thirty marcs which were in arrear, due to plaintiff, of a 
yearly rent of two marcs which the deforciant does not recog^nize. 
Henry son of Herbert acknowledged and granted for himself and his 
heirs that henceforth he will render yearly to the plaintiff and his heirs 
twenty shillings sterling at Kington at the house which was of Adam 
de Prato, at two terms, namely Michaelmas and Easter. If Henry son 
of Herbert or his heirs shall make default in payment at any of the 
terms as is aforesaid, Henry Deverel and his heirs may distrain him for 
all his chattels found on his land at Kington until full payment of the 
money which was in arrear up to that term. For this Henry Deverel 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Henry son of 
Herbert and his heirs all the residue of the said rent and arrears and all 
damage he was said to have sustained by reason of holding back the 
rent until the day this concord was made. 

(188) At Schyreburn, three weeks after Holy Trinity, between 
Juliana de Percy, complainant, and Henry le Deveneys and Juliana 
his wife, impedients, of one hide of land in Esscumbe. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Henry and Juliana 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Juliana de Percy as that which 
she had by their gift. To have and to hold to Juliana de Percy and her 
heirs from the chief lords of that fee by the service which belongs to 
the said land for ever. For this Juliana de Percy gave to Henry and 
Juliana five marcs of silver. 

\Endo7sed^ 
Robert son of Henry de Loscum puts in his claim. 

(189) At Scyrebum, on the morrow of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist, between Hamo de Burton, plaintiff, and John de Thorenny, 
tenent, of one hundred shillings of land in Knytteton. John acknow- 
ledged the land to be the right of Hamo. For this Hamo granted to 
John the said land. To have and to hold to John and his heirs from 
Hamo and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly two shillings 
sterling at Michaelmas, and doing therefor royal service which belongs 
to the said land for all service and exaction. Hamo and his heirs will 
warrant to John and his heirs the said land by the said service against 
all men for ever. John gave to Hamo ten marcs of silver. 

(190) At Schyreburn, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between William de Monte Acuto, complainant, and Robert de la Stane, 
deforciant, of customs and services which William exacts from him in 
respect of the free tenement which he holds from William in Lullewurth, 
whereof William exacts from him that he should render to him yearly 



78 Dorset Fines. 



one pound of cumin, which service Robert before did not recognise. 
Robert acknowledged and granted for himself and his heirs that hence- 
forth they will render yearly to William and his heirs one pound of 
cumin at Michaelmas for the said tenement for all service and exaction. 
For this William remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to 
Robert and his heirs all the damages and arrears which he was said 
to have sustained by reason of detaining the said rent, for ever. Be it 
known that William took the homage of the said Robert in respect of 
the said tenement in the presence of Robert de Novo Burgo chief lord 
of that fee who agreed thereto. 

(191) At Schyreburn, three weeks after Holy Trinity, between 
Nicholas son of Henry, plaintiff, and John de Turbervill, tenent, 
of a moiety of one carucate of land in Cumb and Hennebyr. Assize 
of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Nicholas remitted 
and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to John and his heirs all 
his right and claim in the said land for ever. Moreover Nicholas 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to John and his 
heirs all his right and claim in the land which Margery who was the 
wife of Walter de Cumbe and Juliana who was the wife of Unfrey de 
Cumbe held in Cumbe of the same fee by name of dower on the day 
this concord was made, for ever. For this John gave to Nicholas 
twenty-five marcs of silver. 

(192) At Schyreburn, in the octaves of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist, between Emma daughter of William, plaintiff, and Roger son 
of Roger, tenent, of one virgate of land in Wynterburn Philip's. 
Recognizance of the great assize was summoned between them. Roger 
acknowledged the said land to be the right of Emma and rendered it to 
her at the court. To have and to hold to Emma and her heirs from 
the chief lords of that fee by the service which to the said land belongs 
for ever. For this Emma gave to Roger one marc of silver. 

(193) At Sirburn, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between Ysolda 
who was the wife of Robert de Blockesworh, plaintiff, and Geoffrey 
Prute, tenent, of nine acres of land and six acres of meadow in 
Baggeworth. Geoffrey acknowledged the land and meadow to be the 
right of Ysolda. For this she granted it to Geoffrey. To have and to 
hold to Geoffrey and his heirs from Ysolda and his heirs for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly six shillings sterling at Michaelmas and doing 
royal service as much as belongs to so much land and meadow of the 
fee in the said vill for all service and exaction, and Geoffrey gave to 
Ysolda two marcs of silver. 



29 Henry II L (1244-45). 79 

29 Henry III. (1244-45). 

(194) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Agnes, 
Abbess of St. Edward de Seftonia, complainant, by William Cusin in 
her place, and Geoffrey de la Bere and Matilda his wife, impedients, of 
four virgates of land in Tarente. Plea of warranty of deed was sum- 
moned between them. Geoffrey and Matilda acknowledged the land 
to be the right of the abbess and her church of St. Edward as that 
which she and her church had by their gift. To have and to hold to 
the abbess and her successors and her church from Geoffrey and 
Matilda and the heirs ot Matilda for ever, rendering therefor yearly 
one penny at Easter and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for 
Geoffrey and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda all other services which 
to the said land belong for all service and exaction. And Geoffrey and 
Matilda and the heirs of Matilda will warrant acquit and defend to the 
said Abbess and her successors and her church the said land by the said 
services against all men for ever. For this the Abbess gave to 
Geoffrey and Matilda one hundred marcs of silver. 

(195) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between Juliana 
de Percy, complainant, and Henry le Devene and Juliana his wife, 
deforciants, of one hide of land in Estcumbe, whereof Juliana de Percy 
complained that Henry and Juliana deforced her in respect of twelve 
pence of rent and the homage and service of John de Marisco for the 
tenement that the said John holds in the said vill which belonged to the 
said land. Plea of fine made was summoned between them. Henry 
and Juliana acknowledged the land, except the homage and service of 
John and his heirs, which by that fine ought to remain to them, to be 
the right of Juliana de Percy. To have and to hold to her and her 
heirs from Henry and Juliana and the heirs of Juliana de Devene for 
ever, doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Henry and 
Juliana and the heirs of Juliana all services which belong to that land 
for all service and exaction. Henry and Juliana and the heirs of 
Juliana will warrant that land, except the homage and service above- 
said, to Juliana de Percy and her heirs by the said service against all 
men for ever. Moreover Henry granted to Juliana de Percy one 
ferling of land in Candelemers, namely that ferling which Henry once 
held by gift of Robert Museghe. To have and to hold to Juliana and 
her heirs from Henry and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly 
one pound of cumin at Michaelmas for all service, secular exaction and 
demand. And Henry and his heirs will warrant to Juliana de Percy 
and her heirs the said ferling by the said service against all men for 
ever. For this Juliana de Percy gave to Henry and Juliana two marcs 
of silver. Be it known that the fine in respect of the hide of land before 
made between them by this fine is rendered void. 



8o Dorset Fines, 



(196) At Westminster, five weeks after Easter day, between Gilbert 
de Castello, complainant, and John de Castello, impedient, of six vir- 
gates of land in Castello, Bremleg and Blakeber. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned between them. John acknowledged the land to 
be the right of Gilbert as that which Gilbert had by his g\h. To have 
and to hold to Gilbert and his heirs from the chief lords of those fees 
by the services which to that land belong for ever. For this Gilbert 
granted to John half a virgate of the said land in Castello, namely that 
which William de Fraxine and Roger Paumer formerly held in vileinage 
in the said vill. To have and to hold to John for his life from Gilbert 
and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one halfpenny at Easter for all 
service and exaction. Moreover Gilbert granted for himself and his 
heirs that henceforth they will render every year to John for his life one 
marc of silver at Michaelmas. And that they will give to John for life 
seven quarters of good corn in his manor of Castello at two terms, 
namely Easter and Michaelmas. After John's death the said half 
virgate shall revert to Gilbert and his heirs quit aud Gilbert and his 
heirs shall be quit of the payment of the said com for ever. 

30 Henry III. (1245-46). 

(197) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. John Baptist, between 
Robert, Abbot of the place of St. Edward (** de loco Sancti Edwardi "), 
complainant, by brother Richard de London in his place and William 
de Lindington, impedient, of one carucate of land in Asseleghe. Plea 
of warranty of deed was summoned between them. William acknow- 
ledged the land to be the right of the Abbot and his church of the place 
of St. Edward as that which the Abbot had by his gift. To have and 
to hold to the Abbot and his successors and his church from William 
and his heirs in pure and perpetual alms, freely and quietly for all 
secular service and exaction for ever. And William and his heirs will 
warrant acquit and defend to the Abbot and his successors and his 
church the said carucate of land as free pure and perpetual alms against 
all men for ever. The Abbot received William and his heirs into all 
benefices and orisons which henceforth should be done in his church 
for ever. 

(198) At Westminster fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between Brother Thericcus de Nussa, Prior of the Hospital of St. John 
of Jerusalem in England, plaintiff, by Adam Malbun in his place, and 
Cristiana de Wayepigaz, impedient, by Peter de Ayswell in her place, 
of two hides of land in Waye. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Cristiana acknowledged the land to be the right of the 
Prior and brethren of the said hospital as that which they had by her 
gift. To have and to hold to the Prior and his successors and the said 



31 Henry HI. (1246-47). 8r 

brethren as in demesnes, services of free men, homages, reliefs, escheats, 
vileinages, woods, meadows, pastures and all other things to the said 
land belonging from the chief lords of that fee in free and perpetual 
alms for ever, doing therefor all services which to the said land pertain. 
The Prior received Cristiana and her heirs into all benefices and orisons 
which henceforth shall be done in the said hospital for ever. 

31 Henry III. (1246-47). 

(199) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Fulco, Bishop of London, complainant, by Baldwin de 
Furmeseles in his place, and Bartholomew de Turbervill, impedient, by 
Walter Coyfe in his place, of the manor of Mekebyr. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Bartholomew acknowledged 
the manor in all things without any retainment to be the right of the 
Bishop as that which he had by his gift. To have and to hold to the 
Bishop and his heirs or assigns from Bartholomew and his heirs for 
ever, rendering therefor yearly ten pounds sterling at Michaelmas for 
suit of court, custom, and exaction to Bartholomew or his heirs 
belonging, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee all other 
services which to the said manor pertain. Bartholomew and his heirs 
will warrant, acquit and defend to the said Bishop and his heirs and 
assigns the said manor by the said service against all men for ever. 
For this the Bishop gave to Bartholomew seven score marks of silver. 
Be it known that the Bishop for himself and his heirs and assigns 
undertook to render on behalf of Bartholomew to the Exchequer of the 
King at Westminster one hundred and two pounds in which 
Bartholomew was held to him in respect of the fine of his father, namely, 
the whole for ten years and forty shillings of rent for the eleventh year, 
within which term the Bishop and his heirs or assigns, did not render 
to Bartholomew and his heirs the said service of ten pounds, and in 
the eleventh year the Bishop or his heirs or assigns, shall pay to 
Bartholomew or his heirs, eight pounds and thenceforth every year ten 
pounds as is aforesaid. 

(200) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. Martin, between Hugh 
de Wlneton, plaintiff, and John de Cunde, tenent, of two parts of a 
fourth part of one knight's fee in Wlveton. Hugh remitted and quit 
claimed for himself and his heirs to John and his heirs all his right and 
claim in the same for ever. For this John gave to Hugh one marc of 
silver. 

(201) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Thomas de Hechleg and Agnes his wife, complainants, and Elyas de 
la Mare, deforciant, of one marc of rent in Tarrente Gundevill, where- 

6 



82 Dorset Fines. 



of Thomas and Agnes complained that whereas Elyas should hold from 
them half a carucate of land in the said vill and ought to render one 
marc yearly, he deforced them of half a marc of that service. The 
complainants remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of 
Agnes Elyas and his heirs all their right and claim in the said rent 
for ever. For this Elyas gave to Thomas and Agnes ten marcs of 
silver. 

(202) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Hillary, 
between Andrew de Kardyman, complainant, by William Pocok in his 
place, and William de Byngham, deforciant, by Derlingus de Ryme in 
his place, of the custody and marriage of John Olyver son and heir of 
Walter Olyver, which Andrew claimed to belong to him, because Walter 
held his land in Cornwall by knight's service, and which custody and 
marriage William had by gift of Robert, formerly Bishop of Salisbury, 
by reason that Walter held land of the Bishop in Dorset by knight's 
service. Andrew acknowledged the said custody and marriage of John 
and of his heirs to be the right of William the Elect (Bishop) of 
Salisbury and his church of Salisbury, and remitted and quit claimed the 
same for himself and his heirs to the said Elect and his successors. 
Bishops of Salisbury, and his said church for ever. Thus neithei 
Andrew nor his heirs henceforth can claim or exact anything in the 
said custody and marriage of the said heirs for ever. For this Wiliiam 
de Byngham gave to Andrew fifteen marcs of silver. 

(203) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Hillary, 
between Thomas de Rouill, plaintiff, and John Toluse and Isabella 
his wife, tenents, by the said John in Isabella's place, of one virgate of 
land in Combe. The tenents acknowledged the land to be the right of 
Thomas. For this he granted to them a third part of the said land, 
namely that third part which lies towards the shade (versus umbram). 
To have and to hold to John and Isabella and the heirs of Isabella from 
Thomas and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly half a pound 
of cumin at Michaelmas, and doing therefor royal service as much as 
belongs to so much land of the said fee in the said vill for all service, 
custom and exactioi\. And the residue of the whole of the said land 
shall remain to Thomas and his heirs quit of the heirs of Isabella for 
ever. 

(204) At Warwikes, three weeks after Easter day, between 
William Lungespee, complainant, by Gillemor in his place, and Philip 
Lucyan, impedient, of the hundred of Cogdene and thirty-six shillings 
of rent in Hammes. Philip acknowledged the said hundred and rent 
to be the right of William as those which he had by gift of Philip. To 
have and to hold to William and his heirs from the chief lords of that 
fee for ever, doing therefor all services which to that hundred and rent 



ZZ Henry III. (1248-49). 83 

pertain. Philip and his heirs will warrant to William and his heirs the 
said hundred and rent by the said services against all men for ever. For 
this William gave and granted to Philip ten librates of land in Wam- 
berge, namely all that land which Sewale de Osevile once held in the 
said vill without any retainment and two acres of wood in the wood of 
William de Audeburne cowards the west. To have and to hold to 
Philip and his heirs from William and his heirs for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one pair of gilt spurs or six pence at Easter for all 
service, suit and exaction. William and his heirs will warrant to Philip 
and his heirs the said land and wood by the said service against all men 
for ever. 

32 Henry III. (1247-48). 

(205) At Canterbury, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between William de Monte Acuto, plaintiff, and Adam, Abbot of Ford, 
tenent, of two carucates of land in Tholre. The Abbot acknowledged 
them to be the right of William. For this he granted them to the 
Abbot. To have and to hold to the Abbot and his successors and his 
church of Forde from William and his heirs in free and perpetual alms 
for ever, doing therefor the service of half a knight and doing therefor 
enclosure (clausturam) around the park of Dunthete (of William and 
his heirs), as much as belongs to the said land for all service, custom 
and exaction. William and his heirs will warrant to the Abbot and his 
successors and his church the' said two carucates of land as his free and 
perpetual alms by the said services agamst all men for ever. Moreover 
the Abbot gave to William one hundred marcs of silver. 

33 Henry III. (1248-49). 

(206) At Wilton, on the morrow of the Ascension of the Lord, 
between Richard le Marescal, complainant, and Robert de Pesers and 
Alice his wife, impedients, of two messuages and twenty-three acres of 
land, one acre and a half of meadow in Leg. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned between them. Robert and Alice acknowledged the 
messuages land and meadow to be the right of Richard as those which 
he had by gift of Robert and Alice. To have and to hold to Richard 
and his heirs from Robert and Alice, and the heirs of Alice for ever, 
rendering therefor twelve pence at two terms, namely Michaelmas and 
Easter six pence, and doing therefor royal service as much as belongs . 
to so much land of the said fee in the said vill for all service, custom 
and exaction. Robert and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant, 
acquit and defend to Richard and his heirs the said tenements by the 
said services against all men for ever. For this Richard gave to Robert 
and Alice six marcs of silver. 



84 Dorset Fines. 



(207) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between John de Arraz, plaintiff,. and Richard de Capell and Agnes his 
wife, tenents, of half a virgate of land in Hymbur. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Richard and Agnes ac- 
knowledged the land to be the right of John. For this John granted 
to Richard and Agnes the said land. To have and to hold to Richard 
and Agnes and the heirs of Richard from the chief lords of that fee for 
ever, doing therefor all services which to the said land belong. More- 
over Richard and Agnes at the instance of John granted for themselves 
and the heirs of Richard that henceforth they would render every year 
to the Abbot of Abbedesbyr and his successors twenty shillings 
sterling, at four terms five shillings. 

(208) At Shireburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist 
between Edith daughter of Adam Goddard, plaintiff, and Baldewyn de 
Caune, tenent, of one ferling of land in Cumbe. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Edith remitted and quit 
claimed for herself and her heirs to Baldewyn and his heirs all his right 
and claims in the said land for ever. For this Baldewyn gave to Edith 
half a marc of silver. 

(209) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Laurence, Abbot of Shyreburn, complainant, and William le 
Forester and Juliana his wife, impedients, of three ferlings of land in 
Thornford. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. William and 
Juliana acknowledged the land to be the right of the Abbot and his 
church of Shyreburn as that which he had by their gift. To have and 
to hold to the Abbot and his successors and his said church from 
William and Juliana and the heirs of Juliana in pure and perpetual alms, 
free and quit from all secular service and exaction for ever. For this the 
Abbot gave to William and Juliana half a marc of silver. 

(210) At Shireburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between William de Fukeram, complainant, and Godfrey de Alno, 
deforciant, of common of pasture which William demands to have in 
the wood of Godfrey in Aywode. Recognizance of the great assize was 
summoned between them. William remitted and quit claimed for him- 
self and his heirs to Godfrey and his heirs all the right and claim in the 
said common of pasture for ever. For this Godfrey gave and granted 
to William three acres of land in Cumton, namely one acre which lies 
near Le Surapeltre and one acre which Robert Gele formerly held, and 
one acre which extends above the meadow called Perot. To have and 
to hold to William and his heirs from Godfrey and his heirs for ever, 
doing therefor foreign service which to the said land belongs for all 
service, suit of Court, custom and exaction. Godfrey and his heirs will 
warrant to William and his heirs the said land by the said service 
against all men for ever. 



S3 Henry III. (1248-49). 85 

(211) At Shyrebum, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between William Everard and Matillida his wife, complainants, and 
Agnes de Badeyalton, impedient, of three and a half virgates of land in 
Magna Wyndesor. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between 
them. Agnes acknowledged the land to be the right of William and 
Matillida as that which they had by the grant of Agnes. To have and 
to hold to William and Matillida and the heirs of Matillida, from Agnes 
and her heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of white gloves 
or one penny at Easter, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee 
for Agnes and her heirs all other services which to the said land belongs. 
Agnes and her heirs will warrant acquit and defend to William and 
Matillida and the heirs of Matillida the said land by the said services 
against all men for ever. For this William and Matillida gave to 
Agnes one sore sparrow hawk. 

{Endorsed,) 
William dfe Oreway for himself and Petronilla his wife put in his 
claim. 

(212) At Schirebum, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Hugh Facerlel, complainant, and John de Bukenham, of the 
neifty of the said Hugh. John remitted and quit claimed for himself and 
his heirs to Hugh all his sequels free and quit from all neifty and 
secular service for ever. For this Hugh gave to John four marcs of 
silver. 

(213) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Roger de Oyly, complainant, and William de Glammorgan, im- 
pedient, of a third part of the manor of Tarente Gundevill. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. William acknowledged 
the third part to be the right of Roger as by the gift of William. To 
have and to hold to Roger and his heirs of William and his heirs for ever. 
Yielding therefor yearly one penny at Easter and doing therefor such 
foreign service as belongs to the same, for all service, suit of Court and 
demand. William and his heirs will warrant the same to Roger and 
his heirs against all men for ever. For this, Roger gave to William 
one sore sparrow hawk. 

(214) At Wilton, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Robert, 
Abbot of Bynedon, complainant, by John Bulre in his place, and 
Geoffrey, Abbot of Malmesbyr, impedient, by Richard de Kane' in his 
place, of two hides of land and ten shillings of rent in Winterburn and 
Blauncmuster and three virgates of land in Woll. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. The Abbot of Malmesbyr 
acknowledged the land and rent to be the right of the Abbot of Bynedon 
and his church of Bynedon as by the gift of the Abbot of Malmesbir 
and his convent of that place. To have and to hold to the Abbot of 



86 Dorset Fines. 



Bynedon and his successors and his church of the Abbot of Malmesbyr 
and his successors and his church of Malmesbyr in free and perpetual 
alms. Doing therefor such royal service as belongs to such tenement 
of the same fee in the same vill for all service, custom and demand. 
The Abbot of Malmesbyr and his successors and his church will warrant 
the land and rent to the Abbot of Bynedon and his successors and his 
church as free and perpetual alms by the said service against all men 
for ever. For this the Abbot of Bynedon gave to the Abbot of 
Malmesbyr * shillings sterling. 

(215) At Wilton, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Walter, 
son of Walter de Wynbum, complainant, and Robert de Pesers and 
Alice his wife, impedients, of one messuage and fifteen acres of land in 
Leg. Plea of ws^rranty of deed was summoned between them. Robert 
and Alice acknowledged the messuage and land, that is to say, with 
hommages, services of free men and all other things to the said 
messuage and land pertaining, to be the right of Walter, as by their 
gift. To have and to hold to Walter and his heirs of Robert and Alice 
and the heirs of Alice for ever. Yielding therefor yearly one pair of 
white gloves or one penny at Easter for all service, suit of Court, 
custom and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee 
for Robert and Alice and the heirs of Alice all other services which to 
the said messuage and land do pertain. And Robert and Alice and 
the heirs of Alice will warrant the messuage and land to Walter and 
his heirs by the said services against all men for ever. For this Walter 
gave to Robert and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

f2i6) At Wilton, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Richard 
de Kauz and Alice his wife, complainants, and Henry de Meleburn and 
Cecilia his wife, impedients, of one carucate of land in Wayernaud and in 
Bradeweye. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
Henry and Cecilia acknowledged the land to be the right of Richard 
and Alice, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Richard and Alice 
and the heirs of Alice of Henry and Cecilia and the heirs of Cecilia for 
ever, doing therefor such foreign service as belongs to so much land 
of the same fee in the same vill for all service, custom and demand. 
Henry and Cecilia and the heirs of Cecilia will warrant the land to 
Richard and Alice and the heirs of Alice by the said foreign service 
against all men for ever. And if Alice should die without heirs of her 
body, Richard, if living, shall hold the land during his life of Henry and 
Cecilia and the heirs of Cecilia by the service aforesaid, and after the 
death of Richard the land shall wholly revert to Henry and Cecilia and 
the heirs of Cecilia quit of the heirs of Richard for ever. For this 
Richard and Alice gave to Henry and Cecilia one sore sparrow hawk. 
* Document too soiled to read number of shillings. 



33 Henry III. (1248-49). 87 

(217) At Wilton, on the morrow of Holy Trinity, between William 
Lungespee, complainant, and John de Thurbervill. For this purpose^ 
namely that John should do suit at the hundred (court) of William at 
Kocdene every three weeks. William remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs all the right and claim in the said suit which he 
demanded from John, to John and his heirs for ever. For this John 
granted for himself and his heirs that all his tenants of Cumbe and 
Hembyr henceforth should do suit thrice a year at the said hundred 
(court), namely: first at the hundred for the term of Le Hokeday, 
second at the hundred next following, and third at the hundred for the 
term of St. Martin. If any one of the aforesaid tenants of John or of 
his heirs should chance to be amerced, he ought to be amerced reason- 
ably according to the quantity of the offence and custom of the hundred. 

(218) At Wilton, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Walter^ 
son of Walter de Wynburn, complainant, and Robert de Pesers and 
Alice his wife, impedients, of one messuage and fifteen acres of land in 
Leg. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Robert 
and Alice acknowledged the messuage and land, that is to say with 
hommages, services of free men, and all other things to the said messuage 
and land pertaining, to be the right of Walter, as by their gift. To 
have and to hold to Walter and his heirs of Robert and Alice and the 
heirs of Alice for ever. Yielding therefor yearly one pair of white 
gloves or one penny at Easter for all service, custom and demand, and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Robert and Alice and 
the heirs of Alice all other services which to the said messuage and 
land do pertain. And Robert and Alice and the heirs of Alice will 
warrant the messuage and land to Walter and his heirs by the said 
services against all men for ever. For this Walter gave to Robert and 
Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

(219) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist^ 
between Henry de Haddon, complainant, and Laurence, Abbot of Shyre- 
burn, deforciant, of the custody of the gate of the Abbey of Shyreburn, 
except a third part of forty-five acres of land in Thorneford, Shyreburn and 
Woburn. Henry remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs 
to the Abbot and his successors and his church of Shyreburn the right 
and claim he had in the custody aforesaid with all the appurtenances 
within the Abbey and the barton of the Abbey to the said custody be- 
longing for ever, saving to Henry and his heirs one messuage in Shyre- 
burn and all the lands which were pertaining to the said custody and 
which remain to it by this fine. Moreover Henry remitted and quit 
claimed for himself and his heirs to the Abbot and his successors and 
his church the right and claim which he had to demand any common of 
pasture in the land of the Abbot and his successors and his men of 



88 Dorset Fines. 



^ Stapelbrugg for ever. For this the Abbot granted and rendered to 
Henry the said messuage and the said two parts of the land and like- 
wise five particates of meadow in Thornford, that is to say, that mes- 
suage in Shyrebum which was of Henry de Haddon, father of the 
aforesaid Henry, next to the barton of the Abbot towards the east and 
two parts of sixteen acres of land in the same vill, and the aforesaid 
meadow and two parts of sixteen acres of land in Thornford, and two 
parts of thirteen acres of land in Woburn, that is to say, the aforesaid 
messuage and the whole meadow and the aforesaid two parts of the 
whole of the land which Henry the father at one time held in the vill 
aforesaid as belonging to the said custody of the gate of the Abbey. 
Moreover the Abbot gave and granted to Henry two messuages in 
Shyreburn, that is to say, one messuage which lies between the mes- 
suage of Thomas Lowys and the messuage of Walter le Bretun, and 
one messuage which lies between the messuage of Walter le Brond 
and the messuage of Stephen le Marescall, and two ferlings of land in 
the same vill, except the messuages which are appurtenances of the said 
land and which remain to the Abbot and his successors by this fine, that 
is to say, one ferling of land except the messuage which Hawisia la 
Venteresse once held and one ferling of land except the messuage which 
William Derling once held. To have and to hold to Henrj^ and his heirs 
of the Abbot and his successors and his church for ever. Yielding there- 
for yearly one pound of wax at the Natavity of the Blessed Mary, and 
doing therefor suit at the Court of the Abbot and his successors, of 
Shyreburn, every three weeks. And moreover the Abbot remitted and 
quit claimed for himself and his successors and his church to Henry and 
his heirs all the right and claim he had of demanding any suit at his 
court of Stapelbrugg for ever. And moreover the Abbot granted for 
himself and his successors and his church that all the lands and tene- 
ments, which Joan de Haddon held in dower by gift of Henry the father 
in the vills aforesaid on the day this concord was made, should remain 
after her decease to Henry and his heirs. To hold of the Abbot and his 
successors together with the aforesaid messuages and lands by the 
services which thereto do pertain for ever. 

(220) At Schireburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Richard Chinne, complainant, and Gilbert Ware and Matilda 
his wife, impedients, of a moiety of one messuage in Briddeport. Plea 
of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Gilbert and Matilda 
acknowledged the moiety to be the right of Richard, as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to Richard and his heirs of Gilbert and Matilda 
and the heirs of Matilda for ever, doing therefor all services which to 
the said moiety belong. And Gilbert and Matilda and the heirs of 
Matilda will warrant the moiety to Richard and his heirs by the services 



33 Henry III. (1248-49). 89 



aforesaid against all men for ever. For this Richard gave to Gilbert and 
' Matilda twenty shillings sterling. 

(221) At Schirebum, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Henry de Wulavington, complainant, and Henry de Legh and 
Eva his wife, impedients, of six acres of land and three acres of meadow 
in Wulavington. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between 
them. Henry de Legh and Eva acknowledged the tenements to be the 
right of Henry de Wulavington, as by their gift. To have and to hold 
to Henry de Wulavington of Henry and Eva and the heirs of Eva for 
ever, doing therefor foreign service for all service, custom and demand. 
Henry and Eva and the heirs of Eva will warrant the tenements to 
Henry de Wulavington and his heirs by the aforesaid service against all 
men for ever. For this Henry de Wulavington gave to Henry and Eva 
half a marc of silver. 

(222) At Schirebum, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between John Justin, complainant, and Alured de Lincoln. For this 
purpose, that John complained that Alured unjustly took his cattle and 
demanded from him customs and services which he ought to do for the 
free tenement he held of him in Bakebere. That is to say, that he 
should do to him towards the scutage of forty shillings when it shall 
happen^ twenty-five shillings, and for more, more, and for less, less; 
and to the enclosing of the park of Alured at Dunhethis as much as 
belongs to the said tenement ; and that he should render to him yearly 
five pence towards the help of the Sheriff, which services John does not 
acknowledge. John granted for himself and his heirs that henceforth 
they would do all the above mentioned services to Alured and his heirs 
for the said tenement. For this Alured remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs to John and his heirs all the arrears of the services, 
and the damages he had by reason of the witholding thereof to the day 
when this concord was made. 

(223) At Ivelcestr', fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between William de Heweneburg', plaintiff, and Gerard Costentyn, tenent, 
of a fourth part of one hide of land in Koker. William remitted and 
quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Gerard and his heirs all his 
right and claim in the said land for ever. For this Gerard gave and 
granted to William the hommage and the whole service of Martin son 
of Benedict de Koker and of his heirs in respect of the whole tenement 
which Martin held of him in Koker on the day this concord was made. 

(224) At Schyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between William de Monte Acuto, complainant, and Adam, Abbot of 
Ford, deforciant, of customs and services which William demanded 
from the Abbot for the free tenement which the Abbot held of him in 
Tholre that is to say, two carucates of land. And wherefor William 



90 Dorset Fines, 



demanded from the Abbot that he should do suit at his Court of Schipton 
every three weeks, and the service of half a knight's fee, and enclosing 
around the park of William at Dunhyete as much as belongs to such 
tenement, which suit and services the Abbot does not acknowledge. 
William remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to the 
Abbot and his successors and his church of Ford, the said suit and en- 
closing and all the services which he demanded from him for ever. 
William also granted for himself and his heirs that henceforth the Abbot 
and his successors should have and hold the said 2 carucates in pure 
and perpetual alms, free and quit from all secular service and demand 
for ever. And William and his heirs will warrant the 2 carucates to the 
Abbot and his successors and his church as his pure and perpetual 
alms against all men, except against William de Donelichs and his heirs 
in respect of an annual rent of forty shillings for ever. For this the 
Abbot gave to William de Monte Acuto forty-three marcs of silver. Be 
it known that a fine previously made between them, by this fine is 
annulled. 

(225) At Shireburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist^ 
between Thomas, son of Ham' (? Hamelinus), plaintiff, and William son 
of Nicholas, tenent, of two carucates of land in Maupudre. Thomas 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to William and his 
heirs all his right and claim in the said land. For this William gave 
to Thomas five marcs of silver. 

(226) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist^ 
between Agnes Abbess of Shattesbyr', complainant, and Walter de Frye 
and Amicia his wife, impedients, of half a virgate of land in Henlegh. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Walter and 
Amicia acknowledged the land to be the right of the Abbess and her 
church of Shaftesbyr', as by their gift. To have and to hold to the 
Abbess and other Abbesses who succeed her and her church, for ever of 
Walter and Amicia and the heirs of Amicia in pure and perpetual alms 
free and quit from all secular service and demand. And Walter and 
Amicia and the heirs of Amicia will warrant the said land to the Abbess 
and her successors and her church as free and perpetual alms against 
all men for ever. The Abbess received Walter de Frye and Amicia and 
the heirs of Amicia into all benefits and orisons which henceforth should 
should be done in her church. 

(227) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Thomas Andrew, plaintiff, and Ralph le Bret, tenent, of half 
a hide of land in Stoke. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. Thomas remitted and quit claimed for himself and his 
heirs to Ralph and his heirs all his right and claim in the said land 
for ever. For this Ralph gave to Thomas forty shillings sterling. 



^^ Henry III. (1248-49). 91 

(228) At Schyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Christiana daughter of Aluredy de Horsythe and Matilda her 
sister, plaintiffs, and Robert son of Alured, tenent, of two parts of one 
virgate and fourteen acres of land in Hors3rth. Christiana and Matilda 
remitted and quit claimed for themselves and their heirs to Robert and 
his heirs all their right and claim in the said land for ever. For this 
Robert gave to Christiana and Matilda forty shillings sterling. 

(229) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Richard Chyinne, complainant, and John le Blund and Matilda 
his wife, impedients, of a moiety of one messuage in Brudeport. Plea 
of warranty of deed was summoned between them. John and Matilda 
acknowledged the moiety to be the right of Richard, as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to Richard and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee 
for ever, doing therefor all services which belong to the said moiety. 
And John and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda will warrant the moiety 
to Richard and his heirs by the said services against all men for ever. 
For this Richard gave to John le Blund and Matilda ten shillings 
sterling. 

(230) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between William de Camera, complainant, and Adam son of Wulward 
and Isabella his wife, impedients, of one messuage, half a virgate of 
land and two acres of meadow in Lydinton. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned between them. Adam and Isabella acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of William. For this William at the request 
of Adam and Isabella gave and granted to William de Cokenton the 
said land. To have and to hold to the said William de Cokenton and 
his heirs of the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing therefor all services 
which belong to the said land. And William de Camera and his heirs 
will warrant the said land to William de Cokenton and his heirs by the 
aforsaid services against all men for ever. 

(231) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between John de Waye, plaintiff, and Stephen de Bahus', tenent, of two 
messuages and one hide of land in Waye Hamundevill. Stephen ac- 
knowledged the tenements to be the right of John and rendered them to 
him in Court, excepting a certain croft and common of pasture in a 
certain moor, which are appurtenances of the aforsaid tenements. To 
have and to hold to John and his heirs of Stephen and his heirs for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly twenty shillings at four terms, namely five 
shillings at Michaelmas, Nativity of our Lord, Easter, and Nativity of 
St. John Baptist, for all service and demand. And Stephen and his heirs 
will warrant the tenements to John and his heirs, except as is above- 
said, by the aforesaid services against all men for ever. For this John 
granted the said croft and common of pasture to Stephen, that is to say, 



92 Dorset Fines, 



the croft which is called La Culverheye and which lies on the northern 
side of La Cresseye, and common of pasture for all his cattle every- 
where in that moor which lays between the angle of la Cresseye and 
Scottingesweye except the croft and meadow. To have and to hold to 
Stephen and his heirs of John and his heirs without doing any service 
therefor. Moreover John gave to Stephen ten marcs of silver. 

(232) At Schyreburn, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between John de Legh, complainant, and Henry de la Hele, impedient, 
of half a hide of land in Schyirburn. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned between them. Henry acknowledged the land to be the 
right of John. For this John granted the land to Henry. To have and 
to hold to Henry for life of John and his heirs, rendering therefor 
yearly one penny at Easter and doing therefor to the chief lords of that 
fee all other services which to the said land do pertain. And John and 
his heirs will warrant the said land to Henry by the aforesaid services 
against all men. After the decease of Henry the land shall revert to 
John and his heirs quit of the heirs of Henry, to hold of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which to the said land do pertain for ever. 

(Endorsed^ 
The Bishop of Salisbury put in his claim. 

34 Henry IIL (1249-50). 

(233) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Robert Walraund, complainant, by John de Wuburn in his 
place, and Henry Walraund, impedient, by Peter de Caume in his place, 
of two carucates of land in Kyntton. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned between them. Henry acknowledged the land to be the 
right of Robert, as by gift of Henry. To have and to hold to Robert 
and his heirs of Henry and his heirs for ever, doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee all services which to the said land do pertain. And 
Henry and his heirs will warrant the said land to Robert and his heirs 
by the said services against all men for ever. For this Robert gave to 
Henry twenty marcs of silver. 

(234) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, 
between John de Strode, complainant, and Thomas le Blunt and Agnes 
his wife, impedients, of one hundred solidates of land in Godmauneston. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Thomas and 
Agnes acknowledged the land to be the right of John, as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to John and his heirs of Thomas and Agnes and 
the heirs of Agnes for ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at 
Michaelmas, and doing therefore to the chief lords of that fee for 
Thomas and Agnes and the heirs of Agnes all other services which to 



35 Henry II L (1250-51). 93 

the said land do pertain. Thomas and Agnes and the heirs of Agnes 
will warrant the land to John and his heirs by the services aforsaid 
against all men for ever. For this John gave to Thomas and Agnes 
forty-two marcs of silver. 

(235) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Roger Waspayl, complainant, and Matthew Skelling and 
Matilda his wife, impedients, of two carucates of land in Langeton and 
the advowson of the church of the same vill. Plea of covenant was 
summoned between them. Matthew and Matilda acknowledged the 
land and advowson to be the right of Roger, as by their gift. To 
have and to hold to Roger and his heirs of Matthew and Matilda and 
the heirs of Matilda for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of gilt 
spurs or six pence at Easter, and doing therefor the foreign ser\'ice 
which belongs to the said land and advowson, for all service, suit of 
Court, custom and demand. And Matthew and Matilda and the heirs 
of Matilda will warrant the land and advowson to Roger and his heirs 
by the said services against all men for ever. For this Roger gave to 
Matthew and Matilda one sore sparrow hawk. 

(Endorsed.) 
And Richard de Avenill puts in his claim. 

(236) At Westminster, fifteen days after Trinity, between Edelina 
Skilling, complainant, and Matthew Skilling and Matilda his wife, 
impedients, of one hide of land in Litelbrudie. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned between them. Matthew and Matilda acknowledged 
the land to be the right of Edelina, as by their gift. To have and to 
hold to Edelina and her heirs of Matthew and Matilda and the heirs of 
Matilda for ever, rendering therefor yearly half a pound of cumin at 
Easter, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee all other services 
which to the said land do pertain. And Matthew and Matilda and the 
heirs of Matilda will warrant the land to Edelina and her heirs by the 
aforesaid services against all men for ever. For this Edelina gave 
to Matthew and Matilda one sore sparrow hawk. 



35 Henry III. (1250-51). 

(237) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hillary, 
between Walter Boch and Adam his son, complainants, and Thomas 
Cabus and Emma his wife, impedients, of one virgate of land in 
Bromelham. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
Thomas and Emma acknowledged the land to be the right of Walter 
and Adam, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Walter and Adam 
and the heirs of Walter from Thomas and Emma and the heirs of 



94 Dorset Fines, 



Emma for ever, rendering therefor yearly three shillings at four terms, 
namely nine pence at Easter, Nativity of St. John Baptist, Michaelmas, 
and Nativity of our Lord, for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand. And Thomas and Emma and the heirs of Emma will 
warrant the said land to Walter and Adam and the heirs of Walter hy 
the aforesaid services against all men for ever. For this Walter and 
Adam gave to Thomas and Emma ten marcs of silver. 

(238) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between 
Matilda, Abbess of Tarente, complainant, by Laurence Aynel in her 
place, and Henry de Carenteym, impedient, of ten acres of land and 
two acres of wood in Wudesate. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned between them. Henry acknowledged the land and wood 
together with all that pasture which the Abbess and her church of 
Tarente had by gift of Henry in the said vill on the day this concord 
was made, to be the right of the Abbess and her church of Tarente, as 
by his gift. Moreover Henry gave and granted to the Abbess and her 
church the hommage and the whole service of Thomas le Coninger and 
of his heirs in respect of the whole tenement which the said Thomas 
before held of Henry in. the said vill. To have and to hold to the 
Abbess, and other Abbesses who shall succeed her, and her church 
aforesaid in pure and perpetual alms free and quit from all secular 
service, suit of Court, custom and demand for ever. And Henry and 
his heirs will warrant, acquit and defend to the Abbess and her 
successors, and her church, the said land, wood, pasture and hommage 
and service of the aforesaid Thomas and his heirs as is aforesaid as her 
free, pure and perpetual alms, against all men for ever. And the 
Abbess received Henry and his heirs into all benefits and orisons which 
henceforth should be done in her said Church for ever. 

(239) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between 
Geoffrey de Brideport, complainant, and Agatha de Mesy, impedient, 
by Master William de Mestham in her place, of three carucates of 
land in Kerchel. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between 
them. Agatha acknowledged the land to be the right of Geoffrey, as 
by her gift. To have and to hold to Geoffrey and his heirs of Agatha 
and her heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of gilt spurs 
or six pence at Easter, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that 
fee for Agatha and her heirs all other services which to the said land 
do pertain. And Agatha and her heirs will warrant the said land to 
Geoffrey and his heirs by the aforesaid services against all men for 
ever. For this Geoffrey gave to Agatha one sore sparrow hawk. 

(2^0) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Robert 
Walram, complainant, and William de Parys and Cecilia his wife, 
deforciants, of two carucates of land in Kynton and the advowson of 



35 Henry II L (i 25051). 95 

the church of the same vill. Plea of convention was summoned 
between them. William and Cecilia acknowledged the land and 
advowson to be the right of Robert, and remitted and quit claimed them 
for themselves and the heirs of Cecilia to Robert and his heirs for ever. 
For this Robert granted for himself and his heirs that henceforth he 
would render yearly to William and Cecilia during Cecilia's life, ten 
pounds sterling at Watedon in county of Wilts, at four terms, namely 
two and a half pounds at Nativity of St. John Baptist, Michaelmas, 
Nativity of our Lord and at Easter. Should Robert or his heirs make 
default in the payment at any of the terms, it shall be lawful for William 
and Cecilia to distrain Robert and his heirs in respect of his chattels 
found in the aforesaid manor of Wateden until full payment of the 
arrears of that term, during the life of Cecilia. And after the decease 
of Cecilia, Robert and his heirs shall go quit of the said yearly payment 
of ten pounds for ever. 

(241) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist, between Helewysia Marcel, complainant, and Ralph de Sumeri 
and Albreda his wife, impedients, of two virgates of land in Whyteclive. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Ralph and 
Albreda acknowledged the land to be the right of Helewysia, as by 
their gift. To have and to hold to Helewysia and her heirs of Ralph 
and Albreda and the heirs of Albreda for ever, doing therefor to the 
chief lords of that fee all services which to the said land do pertain. 
And Ralph and Albreda and the heirs of Albreda will warrant the land 
to Helewysia and her heirs by the services aforesaid against all men 
for ever. For this Helewysia gave to Ralph and Albreda fifteen marcs 
of silver. 

(242) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Baldewyn de Wayford, complainant, and Thomas de Cyrencestr* and 
Avicia his wife, impedients, of one carucate of land in Blekeswrthe, 
Warham and Ryston. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Thomas and Avicia acknowledged the land, namely 
whatever they had in the said vill without any retainment, to be the 
right of Baldewyn, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Baldewyn 
and his heirs of Thomas and Avicia and the heirs of Avicia for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one penny at Michaelmas for all service, suit 
of Court, custom and demand belonging to the said Thomas and 
Avicia and the heirs of Avicia, and he shall do to the chief lords of that 
fee for the said Thomas and Avicia and the heirs of Avicia all other 
services which to the said land do pertain. And Thomas and Avicia 
and the heirs of Avicia will warrant the said land to Baldewyn and his 
heirs by the said services against all men for ever. For this Baldewyn 
gave to Thomas and Avicia one hundred marcs of silver. 



96 Dorset Fines, 



36 Henry III. (1251-52). 

(243) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 
Robert de Columber', complainant, and John Coch and Felicia his wife, 
deforciants, of one messuage in Shaftesber. Plea of covenant was 
summoned between them. John and Felicia acknowledged the mes- 
suage to be the right of Robert. To have and to hold to Robert 
and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing therefor all 
services which to the said messuage do pertain. For this Robert gave 
to John and Felicia seven marcs of silver. 

. (244) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Margery who was wife of Roger* son of Pagan, complainant, and 
William de Welles, deforciant, of the advowson of the chapel of 
Swanewyz. Assize of last presentation was summoned between them. 
William acknowledged the advowson of the chapel to be the right of 
Robert son and heir of the said Pagan, and of the warrant of the afore- 
said Margery concerning her dower ; and rendered the same to Margery 
in the Court, as belonging to the dower which she had in the said vill, 
and remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Robert and 
his heirs for ever. For this Margery gave to William one sore sparrow 
hawk. 

(245) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, 
between Robert Walerand, complainant, and Robert de Columbariis, 
deforciant, of two carucates of land in Salterton and Derneford. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. Robert de Columbariis 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Robert Walrand, as by his 
gift. To have and to hold to Robert Walerand and his heirs of Robert 
de Columbariis and his heirs for ever, doing therefore service of three 
parts of a knight's fee for all service, suit of Court and demand. For 
this Robert Walerand gave to Robert de Columbariis fourteen score 
marcs of silver. Be it known that Robert de Columbariis, and Margery 
his wife who was present in Court have granted for themselves and 
their heirs that henceforth they will neither give, sell, pledge nor in any 
other way alien lands and tenements which they held either in Kandel 
or elsewhere on the day this concord was made, nor lands and tenements 
which they might acquire or which might come to them by right of 
inheritance wheresoever they may be in England, lest they would have 
insufficient lands whereby they could warrant the said land which 
remains to them by this fine, to Robert Walerand and his heirs against 
all men for ever. s 

(246) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 

* There is some confusion in the writing of the word Roger. It looks as if it had 
been written Robert. 



36 Henry III, (1251-52). 97 

Robert de Columbariis and Margery his wife, William de Sarr' and 
Mathea his wife, complainants, and Agnes, Abbess of St. Edward of 
Shaftesbury, deforciant, of a rent of ten fresh salmon (decem salmonum 
recencium et pugnatium super caudam) in Purschondel. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. The Abbess remitted and 
quit claimed, for herself and other Abbesses her successors, and her 
church of St Edward, to Robert and Margery, William and Mathea 
and the heirs of Margery and Mathea, all her right and claim in the 
said rent for ever. For this Robert and Margery, William and Mathea 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Margery and Mathea that 
henceforth they will render yearly to the Abbess and her church, and 
other Abbesses her successors four marcs of silver at the feast of the 
Assumption of the Blessed Mary, at Shaftebery. If they make 
default in the payment at any term, it shall be lawful for the Abbess 
and her church and other Abbesses her successors to destrain them by 
their chattels in their tenement at Purscandel up to the full amount of 
the arrears for that term. 

(247) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Roger, Master of the Hospital of St. John, of 
Dorset, complainant, and Henr}' de Lund, impedient, of one messuage, 
one mill, thirteen acres of land, two acres and a half of meadow in 
Loudeston. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
Henry acknowledged the tenements together with the capital messuiage 
which Henry held in the said vill on the day this concord was made, 
to be the right of the Master and hospital, as by his gift. To have and 
to hold to the Master and his successors. Masters of the said hospital 
and the brothers and sisters of the said hospital of Henry and his heirs 
in free and perpetual alms for ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny 
at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, custom and demand to 
the Priory of Henry and his heirs belonging, and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of that fee for Henry and his heirs all other services 
which to the same tenements do pertain. And Henry and his heirs 
will warrant to the Master and his successors, masters of the said 
Hospital and the brothers and sisters of the said hospital, the said 
messuage, mill, land and meadow as their free and perpetual alms by 
the said services against all men for ever. And the said Master received 
Henry and his heirs into all benefits and orisons which henceforth they 
should do in the hospital aforesaid, for ever. 

(248) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Robert de London*, plaintiff, and brother Robert de Maneby, tenent, 
Prior of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem in England, by brother 
William de Horseley in his place, of one messuage in Prummeslegh 
and two carucates of land in the said vill and in Shyreburn. Robert 

7 



98 Dorset Fines, 



acknowledged the messuage and land to be the right of the Prior and 
brothers of the Hospital. To have and to hold of Robert and his heirs 
for ever, doing therefor the service of the fourth part of a knight's fee, 
and acquitting Robert and his heirs against the chief lords of that fee 
from all suits to the said messuage and land belonging, for all service, 
custom and demand. And Robert and his heirs will warrant the said 
tenements to the Prior and his successors and the said brothers by the 
said services against all men for ever. For this the Prior gave to 
Robert ten pounds sterling. 

(249) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 
Emericus de Treus, plaintiff, and John Cusin, tenent, of one messuage, 
sixteen acres of land, three acres of meadow and three acres of 
moor in Terente Kaynes, and four acres of meadow in Blakemitford. 
Recognizance of the great assise was summoned between them. John 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Emericus and rendered 
them to him in Court, and remitted and quit claimed for himself and 
his heirs to Emericus and his heirs for ever. For this Emericus gave 
to John sixty shillings sterling. 

(250) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 
Robert de Columbariis, complainant, and William de Sarr' and Mathea 
his wife, deforciants, of one carucate of land in Whetenecandel. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. William and Mathea 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Robert and remitted and quit 
claimed for himself and the heirs of Mathea to Robert and his heirs for 
ever. For this Robert gave to William and Mathea fifty marcs of 
silver. 

37 Henry III. (1252-53). 

(251) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 
Robert Walrand, complainant, and Roger de Langeford, deforciant, of 
two carucates of land in Kyngton. Plea of covenant was summoned 
between them. Roger acknowledged the land to be the right of Robert. 
For this Robert granted to Roger the said land, except the advowson 
of the church of the same vill. To have and to hold to Roger for life 
of Robert and his heirs, doing therefor all services which to the said 
land do pertain. And Robert and his heirs will warrant the land to 
Roger for life, except the advowson, by the said services against all men. 
After the decease of Roger the land shall revert to Robert and his heirs 
quit of the heirs of Roger for ever. Moreover Roger granted for himself 
that henceforth he will not give, sell, pledge nor in any other way alien 
any of the said land, nor make waste, sale or spoil of the said land, 
by which the said land after the decease of Roger should not wholly 
revert to Robert and his heirs quit for ever. 



n Henry III. (1252-53). 99 



(252) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of the Nativity of 
St. John Baptist, between Walter de Burges, complainant, and Robert 
Thankon and Cristiana his wife, impedients, of one messuage and six 
bovates of land in Wynterburn Blauncmuster. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned between them. Robert and Cristiana acknow- 
ledged the messuage and land to be the right of Walter as by their g\b.. 
To have and to hold to Walter and his heirs of Robert and Cristiana 
and the heirs of Cristiana for ever, rendering therefor yearly one half- 
penny at Michaelmas for all services, suits of court, customs and 
demands to Robert and Cristiana and the heirs of Cristiana belonging, 
and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for them, all other 
services which to the said messuage and land do pertain. And Robert 
and Cristiana and the heirs of Cristiana will warrant the messuage 
and land to Walter and his heirs by the said services against all men 
for ever. For this Walter gave Robert and Cristiana one sore sparrow 
hawk. 

(253) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of the Nativity of 
St. John Baptist, between Laurence de la Bere and Eva his wife, 
plaintiffs, and Roger, Abbot of Abbedesbyr, tenent, of five ferlings of 
land in Wodeton. Laurence and Eva remitted and quit claimed for 
themselves and the heirs of Eva to the Abbot and his successors and 
his church of Abbeddesbyr all their right and claim in the aforesaid 
land for ever. For this the Abbot gave to Laurence and Eva twenty 
marcs of silver. 

(254) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Thomas de Vaym, complainant, and William de Rundfrigeray and 
Basilia his wife, deforciants, of one virgate and a half of land in 
Shelfhamton. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. 
William and Basilia acknowledged the land to be the right of Thomas, 
as by their gift. To have and to hold to Thomas and his heirs of 
William and Basilia and the heirs of Basilia for ever, rendering there- 
for yearly one penny at Easter, and doing therefor to the chief lords 
of that fee for William and Basilia and the heirs of Basilia, all other 
services which to the said land do pertain. And William and Basilia 
and the heirs of Basilia will warrant the land by the said services to 
Thomas and his heirs against all men for ever. For this Thomas gave 
to William and Basilia twenty marcs of silver. 

(255) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Richard de Havering, complainant, and Walter le Vineter de Chapwyk 
and Alice his wife, impedients, of thirty-seven and a half acres of 
meadow in Chapwyk. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between 
them. Walter and Alice acknowledged the land and meadow to be the 
right of Richard, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Richard and 



ICXD Dorset Fines, 



his heirs of Walter and Alice and the heirs of Alice for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one half penny at Michaelmas, and doing to the scutage 
of twenty shillings when it should happen, as much as belongs to so 
much land of that fee in that vill for all service, suit of Court, custom 
and demand. And Walter and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant 
the land and meadow to Richard and his heirs by the aforesaid services 
against all men for ever. Moreover Walter and Alice remitted and 
quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of Alice to Richard and his 
heirs, all their right and claim in thirty-seven acres of land in Chapwyk 
which Alice daughter of Ralph de Chapwyk formerly held, for ever. 
For this Richard gave to Walter and Alice one hundred shillings 
sterling. 

(256) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Matilda, Abbess of Tarente, complainant, by Adam de Welle- 
ford in her place, and William de Kaynes. The Abbess complained 
that William depastured with his cattle the demesne pasture and grass 
of the Abbess in Tarente. William remitted and quit claimed for him- 
self and his heirs to the Abbess and other Abbesses who should succeed 
her, and her church, all the right and claim he had to demand or have 
any pasture or common of pasture in any of the lands, meadows or 
pastures which the same Abbess held in Tarente and Crauford on the 
day this concord was made, for ever, so that it shall be lawful for the 
Abbess and other Abbesses who succeed her to enclose with a ditch or 
hedge all the aforesaid meadows and pastures and make her profit 
therefrom at her pleasure without let or hindrance of the aforesaid 
William or of his heirs, saving to William and his heirs his warren in 
the same lands and tenements. So nevertheless that of the cattle of 
William or his heirs by default in the enclosing enter upon the grass 
meadows and pasture of the Abbess or her successors, they shall not 
be impounded but chased out, without detaining the cattle, for ever. 
Moreover William granted for himself and his heirs as much as belongs 
to them, that the said Abbess and her successors may have a free and 
several fishery in all the waters of Tarente, as well in the water which 
is called Le Esture as in the water which is called Tarente where the 
lands of the Abbess are or in either of the said waters, and that they 
may take and have reeds and wild Bags (Ros et glaiol) there in the 
said waters. And likewise that the Abbess and her successors may 
repair and sustain the weirs and ponds of her mills of Tarente without 
any claim which William or his heirs may have there in the aforesaid 
waters, for ever. For this the Abbess remitted and quit claimed for 
herself and successors and her church to William and his heirs 
pasture for seven cows and one bull which the Abbess formerly had in 
the demesne pasture of William in Tarente with the beasts of William. 



38 Henry III. (1253.54). loi 

Thus, neither the Abbess nor her successors shall henceforth have 
pasture for any cow or bull in the demesne pasture of William or his 
heirs, saving to the Abbess and her successors and her church the 
aforesaid pasture for thirty-four anywhere in the pasture of William 
and his heirs in the manor of Tarente with the beasts of William and 
his heirs for ever. 

(257) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between John 
de Strod, complainant, and Simon Robbe and Cristiana his wife, de* 
forciants, of one carucate of land in Woche. Plea of covenant was 
summoned between them. Simon and Cristiana acknowledged the 
land to be the right of John, and remitted and quit claimed for them* 
selves and the heirs of Cristiana to John and his heirs for ever. For 
this John gave to Simon and Cristiana one hundred marcs of silver. 

(258) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Richard de Avenill, complainant, and Robert, parson of the 
Church of Cereberg, impedient, by Hugh Cokus in his place, of one 
virgate of land in Lyceministr*. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Robert acknowledged the land, namely, whatever he 
formerly had in the said vill without any retainment, to be the right 
of Richard as by his gift. To have and to hold to Richard and Isolda 
his wife and the heirs of Richard of Robert and his heirs for ever, doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Robert and his heirs all services 
which to the said land do pertain. And Robert and his heirs will 
warrant the land to Richard and Isolda and the heirs of Richard by the 
said services against all men for ever. For this Richard and Isolda 
gave to Robert twenty shillings sterling. 

(259) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 
Matilda, Abbess of Tarente, complainant, and Richard Longespeye, 
deforciant, of sixty acres of pasture in Vpwymburn. Richard ac- 
knowledged the pasture, namely that which is called la Weyte to be the 
right of the Abbess and her church of Tarente, and remitted and quit 
claimed the same for himself and his heirs to the Abbess and her suc- 
cessors, and her church for ever. And the Abbess received Richard 
and his heirs into all benefits and orisons which henceforth they should 
do in her church for ever. 

38 Henry III. (1253-54). 

(260) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Jordan 
Beleiambe and Amicia his wife, plaintiffs, and John de Scovill, tenent, 
of two virgates and three acres of land in La Linche. Jordan and 
Amicia remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of Amicia 
to John and his heirs all their right and claim in the said land for ever. 
For this John gave to Jordan and Amicia forty shillings sterling. 



I02 Dorset Fines. 



(261) At Westminster, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between 
Peter Chaceport, complainant, and William de Gouiz, impedient, of 
three acres of land in Deuelisse and the advowson of the church of 
Melleburn. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned bet^\'een them. 
William acknowledged the land and advowson of the church together 
with the chapel of Deuelisse and all other things to the said land and 
advowson of the aforesaid church of Meleburn belonging, to be the right 
of Peter, as by the gift of William. To have and to hold to Peter and 
his heirs of William and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly 
one penny at Easter for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. 
And William and his heirs will warrant the said land and advowson of 
the church by the aforesaid services, to Peter and his heirs against all 
men for ever. For this Peter gave to William one hundred marcs of 
silver. 

(262) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between William de la Bere and Dionisia his wife, complainant, and 
Richard le Longer and Agnes his wife, impedients, of two ferlings of 
land in Merswode. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between 
them. Richard and Augnes {sic) acknowledged the land to be the right of 
Dionisia, as that which William had by their gift in marriage with her. 
To have and to hold to William and Dionisia and the heirs of Dionisia 
from Richard and Augnes and the heirs of Augnes for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly six pence at Easter and doing therefor the foreign service 
which to the said land belongs, for all service, suit of Court, custom 
and demand. And Richard and Agnes and the heirs of Augnes will 
warrant the said land by the said services to William and Dionisia and 
the heirs of Dionisia, against all men for ever. If Dionisia died with- 
out heirs of her body, then the land shall revert to Richard and Augnes 
and the heirs of Augnes quit for ever. For this William and Dionisia 
gave to Richard and Agnes one sore sparrow hawk. 

(Endorsed,) 

Roger de Chyldheye and Joan his wife put in their claim. 

(263) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 

Agnes, Abbess of Shaftebir', plaintiff, by Reginald Patin in her place, 

and Roger Gaugy, tenent, of one hide of land in Haregrave. Roger 

acknowledged the land to be the right of the Abbess and her church of 

Shaftebir'. For this the Abbess granted it to Roger and Alice his wife. 

Moreover the Abbess granted to Roger and Alice a certain pasture in 

the said vill which is called Cumbe and MuUecumbe. To have and to 

hold to Roger and Alice from the Abbess and her successors, and her 

church, during the life of both Roger and Alice, rendering therefor yearly 

two shillings at four terms, namely six pence at the Nativity of St. 

John Baptist, Michaelmas, the Nativity of our Lord and Easter, and 



39 Henry II L (1254-55). 103 

doing therefor all other services which to the said tenement belong. 
And the Abbess and her successors, and her church will warrant to 
Roger and Alice for their lives the said land and pasture by the afore- 
said services against all men. After the decease of both Roger and Alice 
the land and pasture shall revert to the Abbess and her successors and 
her church quit of the heirs of Roger and Alice for ever. 

39 Henry III. (1254-55). 

(264) At Westminster, in the morrow of Souls, '^' between William, 
Bishop of Salisbury, complainant, and Eudo de Rocheford and Grecia 
his wife, deforciants, of half a carucate of land in Tyderlegh. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. Eudo and Grecia ac- 
knowledged the land, as in demesnes, hommages, services of free men, 
vileinage, rents, escheats, wards, reliefs, meadows, pastures, woods, 
moors and all other things belonging to the said land, namely, what- 
ever Eudo and Grecia formerly had, and what to them could come 
in the said vill without any retainment, to be the right of the Bishop 
and his church of Salisbury, and remitted and quit claimed the same 
for themselves and the heirs of Grecia to the Bishop and his successors 
and his church for ever. Moreover Eudo and Grecia granted for them- 
selves and the heirs of Grecia that all lands and tenements which 
Avicia de Morteshorn held in dower in the said vill of the inheritance 
of Grecia and which ought to revert to her or her heirs after the death 
of Avicia shall instead revert to the Bishop and his successors and his 
church, quit of Eudo and Grecia and the heirs of Grecia for ever. For 
this the Bishop gave to Eudo and Grecia sixty marcs of silver. 

(265) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between Hele- 
wysia Martel, complainant, and Robert son of Gilbert and Anastasia 
his wife, impedients, of four bovates of land in Wytteclive. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Robert and Anastasia 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Helewysia, as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to Helewysia and her heirs of Robert and Anas- 
tasia and the heirs of Anastasia for ever, doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for Robert and Anastasia and the heirs of Anastasia 
all services which belong to the said land. And Robert and Anastasia 
and the heirs of Anastasia will warrant the land to Helewysia and her 
heirs by the said services against all men for ever. For this Helewysia 
gave to Robert and Anastasia seventeen marcs of silver. 

(266) At Westminster, in the octaves of Saint Martin, between 
Sybilla de Rocheford, complainant, and Eudo de Rocheford and Grecia 
his wife, impedients, of one carucate of land in Dybrewurth. Plea of 

* Sic crastino animarum. 



I04 Dorset Fines. 



warranty of deed was summoned between them. Eudo and Grecia ac- 
knowledged the land to be the right of Sybilla, as by their gift. To 
have and to hold to Sybilla and the heirs of her body of Eudo and 
Grecia and the heirs of Grecia for ever, rendering therefor yearly one 
pair of white gloves or one penny at Easter, and doing therefor to the 
chief lords of that fee for Eudo and Grecia and the heirs of Grecia all 
other services which belong to the said land. If Sybilla should die 
without heirs of her body the land shall remain to Eudo son of Eudo, 
brother of Sybilla, and his heirs. To hold of Eudo and Grecia and the 
heirs of Grecia by the services aforsaid for ever. And Eudo de Roche- 
ford and Grecia and the heirs of Grecia will warrant the land by the 
aforesaid services to Sybilla and the heirs of her body or to Eudo son of 
Eudo and his heirs if Sybilla died without heirs of her body, against all 
men for ever. For this Sybilla gave Eudo de Rocheford and Grecia 
one sore sparrow hawk. 

40 Henry III. (1255-56). 

(267) At Wilton, one month after Easter day, between Robert Wal- 
raund, complainant, and Cecilia Walraund, impedient, of two carucates of 
land in Kington and Magerston. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Cecilia acknowledged the land to be the right of Robert, 
as by her gift. For this Robert granted the land to Cecilia. To have 
and to hold to Cecilia for life, of Robert and his heirs, rendering there- 
for yearly one penny at Michaelmas, and doing therefor the foreign 
service which belongs to the said land, for all service, custom and 
demand. And Robert and his heirs will warrant the land by the said 
services to Cecilia against all men during her life. And after her 
decease the land shall revert to Robert and his heirs. To hold from 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that land for 
ever. And the heirs of Cecilia will warrant the land by the said services 
to Robert and his heirs against all men for ever. 

[Note.  Fine No 268 is removed to Hertfordshire.] 

(269) At Schyreburne, in the morrow of Holy Trinity, between 
Richard son of Elyas, complainant, and Richard Chyriel and Juliana his 
wife, deforciants, of one virgate of land in Horsythe and Boverig. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. Richard Chyriel and Juliana 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Richard son of Elyas, as by 
their gift. To have and to hold to Richard son of Elyas and his heirs 
of the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing therefor all services which 
to the said land do belong. For this Richard son of Elyas gave to 
Richard and Juliana one hundred shillings sterling. 

(270) At Ivelcestr, five weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, between 



40 Henry III. (1255-56). 105 

 ' 

Henry Trit, plaintiiT, and John le gentil, tenent, of one virgate of land 
in Cherleton. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. 
John acknowledged the land to be the right of Henry, and rendered it 
to him in the Court To have and to hold to Henry and his heirs of 
John and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly five shillings at 
two terms, namely one moiety at Michaelmas and the other moiety at 
Easter, and doing therefor such foreign service as belongs to so much 
land of the said fee in the said vill for all service, suit of Court, custom 
and demand. And John and his heirs will warrant the said land to 
Henry and his heirs by the aforesaid service against all men for ever. 
For this Henry gave to John twenty shillings sterling. 

(271) At Ivelcestr', fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Thomas de Haweye and Alice his wife, plaintiffs, and Peter 
de Kermerdin and Margery his wife, tenents, of one messuage and two 
carucates of land in Mapeldretton. Thomas and Alice remitted and 
quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of Alice to Peter and Margery 
and the heirs of Margery, all their right and claim in the said messuage 
and land for ever. For this Peter and Margery gave to Thomas and 
Alice thirty marcs of silver. 

(272) At Ivelcestr', one month after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Henry de Haddon, complainant, and Alan de Wodebrigg', for 
this matter, namely, that Alan together with Henry his partner should 
repair the mill of Candel Joce. Alan acknowledged and granted for 
himself and his heirs that henceforth he together with Henry and his 
heirs would repair and sustain the said mill for ever. Thus Alan and 
his heirs henceforth may receive a moiety of the tolls and of all the other 
issues of the said mill, and Henry and his heirs the other moiety. 
Moreover Alan remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to 
Henry and his heirs all his right and claim in six pence of rent which 
he was accustomed to receive from Henry for the mill pond, for ever. 
For this Henry remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to 
Alan and his heirs all his right and claim to demand free multure for 
his household in the said mill, for ever. 

(273) At Schirebum, in the morrow of Holy Trinity, between 
Nicholas Red and Isabella his wife, complainants, and Richard de 
Rovill, impedient, of twelve acres of land in Wrth. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Richard acknowledged the 
land to be the right of Nicholas and Isabella, as by his gift. To have 
and to hold to Nicholas and Isabella and their heirs of Richard and his 
heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one clove gilly flower at Easter, 
and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Richard and his heirs 
all other services which to the said land do pertain. And Richard and 
his heirs will warrant the land to Nicholas and Isabella and their heirs. 



io6 Dorset Fines. 



by the aforesaid services against all men for ever. If Isabella should 
happen to die without heirs begotten by Nicholas, the land shall remain 
to Nicholas and his heirs for ever. For this Nicholas and Isabella gave 
to Richard one sore sparrow hawk. 

(274) At Schireburne, in the morrow of Holy Trinity, between 
William son of John, junior, complainant, and John de Mortestorn, 
impedient, of a moiety of the manor of Mortestorn. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. John acknowledged the moiety 
to be the right of William, as by his gift. To have and to hold to 
William and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing there- 
for all services which to the said moiety do pertain. For this William 
gave to John one sore sparrow hawk. 

(275) At Schireburn, in the morrow of Holy Trinity, between 
Richard de Childehaye, complainant, and Eudo de Sandputte and Lucia 
his wife, impedients, of one virgate and one ferling of land in Childe- 
haye. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
Eudo and Lucia acknowledged the land to be the right of Richard, as 
by their gift. To have and to hold to Richard and his heirs of Eudo 
and Lucia and the heirs of Lucia for ever rendering therefor yearly two 
pounds of cumin and twelve pence at two terms, namely two pounds 
of cumin at Michaelmas, and twelve pence at the Nativity of our 
Lord, and doing therefor such foreign service as belongs to so much 
land of the said fee in the said vill for all service, suit of Court, 
custom and demand. And Eudo and Lucia and the heirs of Lucia will 
warrant the said land to Richard and his heirs by the services aforesaid 
against all men for ever. For this Richard gave to Eudo and Lucia 
one sore sparrow hawk. 

(276) At Schyreburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Bartholomew son of Adam, plaintiff, and Walter le Flameng, tenent, 
of half a hide and half a virgate of land in Wottune. Bartholomew re- 
mitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Walter and his 
heirs all his right and claim in the land for ever. For this Walter gave 
to Bartholomew, eighteen marcs of silver. 

(277) At Schyreburn, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Nicholas, Prior of St. Trinity of Twynham, complainant, and 
Elyas de Rabayne and Matilda his wife, by Robert de Wynterburne, in 
their place, deforciants, of a moiety of the vill of Litlepidele. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. Elyas and Matilda acknow- 
ledged the moiety of the vill to be the right of the Prior and his church 
of St. Trinity of Twynham. To have and to hold to the Prior and his 
successors and his church of Elyas and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda 
for ever, doing therefor the service of half a knight's fee for all service, 
suit of Court, custom and demand. And Elyas and Matilda and the 



40 Henry III. (1255-56). 107 

heirs of Matilda will warrant, acquit and defend the moiety to the Prior 
and his successors and his church by the service aforsaid against all men 
for ever. For this the Prior remitted and quit claimed for himself and 
his successors and his church to Elyas and Matilda and the heirs of 
Matilda, all his right and claim to demand from them any suit at his 
hundred of Pideleton every three weeks, for ever. 

(278) At Schyreburn, in octaves of Holy Trinity, between Robert de 
London, complainant, and Martin de Cerne and Mabilia his wife, im- 
pedient, of one virgate of land in Cern Monachorum. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Martin and Mabilia acknow- 
ledged the land, namely whatever they had before in the said vill without 
any retainment, to be the right of Robert, as by their gift. To have 
and to hold to Robert and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee for ever, 
doing therefor all services which to the said land do pertain. For this 
Robert gave to Martin and Mabilia two marcs of silver. 

(279) At Schyreburn, in the morrow of Holy Trinity, between 
William son of Geoffrey de Welles, complainant, and Geoffrey de 
Welles, deforciant, of one carucate of land in Welles. Plea of covenant 
was summoned between them. Geoffrey acknowledged the land to be 
the right of William, as by the gift of Geoffrey. For this William 
granted to Geoffrey the said land, to have and to hold to Geoffrey during 
life, of William and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one pound of 
cumin at Michaelmas, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee 
for William and his heirs all other services which to the said land do 
pertain. And William and his heirs will warrant the land to Geoffrey 
by the services aforesaid against all men during the life of Geoffrey, 
and after his decease the land shall revert to William and his heirs, to 
hold from the chief lords of that fee by the services which to the said 
land do pertain. 

(280) At Schyreburn, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Robert son of William de Cherleton, complainant, and William 
son of William de Cherleton, impedient, of one messuage and one 
virgate of land in Sturm inystr*. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned between them. William acknowledged the messuage 
and land to be the right of Robert, as by his gift. To have and 
to hold to Robert and his heirs, of William and his heirs for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one pair of white gloves or one penny at 
Easter, and doing therefor the service of the twentieth part of a 
knight*s fee for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And 
William and his heirs will warrant the messuage and land to Robert 
and his heirs by the service aforesaid against all men for ever. If 
Robert should happen to die without heirs of his body begotten, the 
messuage and land will remain to William his brother, and the heirs of 



io8 Dorset Fines. 



his body begotten, to hold of William son of William de Cherleton and 
his heirs by the service aforesaid for ever. If the aforesaid William 
should happen to die without heirs of his body begotten, the messuage 
and land should revert to the aforesaid William son of William de 
Cherleton and his heirs, quit, for ever. 

(281) At Schireburne, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Henry de Meleburne, complainant, and William de Gowiz. For this 
matter, namely, that William should permit Henry to have reasonable 
estovers in his woods at Deveiys. William acknowledged and granted 
for himself and his heirs that Henry and his heirs henceforth may have 
reasonable estovers for husbote and heybote, that is to say, for the 
messuage which Lucas de Meleburne holds from Henry in Meleburne 
in the wood of William and his heirs at Develis, by view of the bailiffs 
of William and his heirs for ever. If it should happen that the 
bailiffs of William or of his heirs did not wish to be present at the 
taking of the estovers, or freely withdrew themselves, Henry and his 
heirs may nevertheless take the aforesaid reasonable estovers without 
the view of the same bailiffs, as is aforesaid, without let or hindrance 
of William or of his heirs for ever. 

(282) At Schireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Peter 
de Clopton, Walter de Leweston and John Quintin, plaintiffs, and 
John de Chartrey, who William Le Chanu and Philippa his wife 
called to warrant and who warranted them in respect of one messuage, 
half a virgate, one and a half acre of land, and half an acre of meadow 
in Overelilengton and Leweston. John de Chartray acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of Peter, Walter and John Quintin and 
rendered them to them at the Court. To have and to hold to Peter, 
Walter and John Quintin and their heirs of the chief lords of that fee 
for ever, doing therefor all services which to the said tenenr.ents do 
pertain. For this Peter, Walter and John Quintin gave to John de 
Chartray six marcs of silver. 

(283) At Schireburn, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between William le Fraunceis, plaintiff, and Walter le Verrer and 
Juliana his wife, Terricus Leviet and Agnes his wife, Robert son of 
Thomas de Radelington and Alice his wife, Ralph le Male and Joan 
his wife, Cristiana daughter of Thomas le Fraunceis, Eufemia, Mabilia 
and Margery, sisters of Cristiana, tenents, of one messuage and two 
parts of seventy-nine acres of land in Wlgareston. And between the 
same William, plaintiff and the aforesaid Walter and Juliana, Terricua 
and Agnes, Robert and Alice, Ralph and Joan, Cristiana, Eufemia, 
Mabilia and Margery, who Joan who was the wife of Thomas le 
Fraunceis vouched to warrant and who warranted her of a third part 
of seventy-nine acres of land in the said vill and whereupon recognizance 



40 Henry III, (1255-56). 109 

of the great assize was summoned between them. William remitted 
and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Walter and Juliana, 
Terricus and Agnes, Robert and Alice, Ralph and Joan, Cristiana, 
Eufemia, Mabilia and Margery and the heirs of Juliana, Agnes, Alice, 
Joan, Cristiana, Eufemia, Mabilia and Margery, all his right and 
claim in the said messuage and land for ever. For this they gave 
to William eight marcs of silver. 

(284) At Schyreburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between John 
son of Gilbert, plaintiff, and Geoffrey de Lambroc and Cecilia his wife, 
tenents, of one messuage and three virgates of land in Westkorescumb. 
John remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Geoffrey 
and Cecilia and the heirs of Geoffrey, all right and claim in the 
messuage and land, for ever. For this Geoffrey and Cecilia gave to 
John ten pounds of silver. 

(285) At Schyreburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Richard 
son of Elias, complainant, and Matilda la Noreys, deforciant, of a 
moiety of one virgate of land in Horseth and Boverug. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. Matilda acknowledged the 
land to be the right of Richard, as by her gift. To have and to hold to 
Richard and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing 
therefor all services which to the said land do pertain. For this Richard 
gave to Matilda forty shillings sterling. 

(286) At Schireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Nicholas de Moles, complainant, and John de Cnolle and Cristiana 
his wife, impedients, of one messuage and sixty acres of land in la 
Cnolle. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
John and Cristiana acknowledged the messuage and land, namely 
whatever they held before in the said vill, without any retainment to 
be the right of Nicholas, as by their gift. To have and to hold to 
Nicholas and his heirs, of the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing 
therefor all services which to the said messuage and land do pertain. 
For this Nicholas gave to John and Cristiana twelve marcs of silver. 

(Endorsed.^ 
Alice de Bosco puts in her claim. 

(287) At Schyreburne, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Richard de Capella, complainant, and Hugh de Fortune, 
deforciant, of half a hide of land in La Bere. Plea of covenant was 
summoned between them. Hugh acknowledged the land to be the 
right of Richard, and rendered it to him at the Court, and remitted and 
quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Richard and his heirs for ever. 
For this, Richard granted to Hugh, three virgates of land in Waye, 
namely, whatever he held before in the said vill without any retain- 
ment. To have and to hold to Hugh during life of Richard and his 



I lo Dorset Fines. 



heirs, rendering therefor yearly six shillings and eight pence at two 
terms, namely, one moiety at Michaelmas, and the other moiety at 
Easter, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Richard 
and his heirs all other services which to the said land, which remains 
to him by this fine, belong. And Richard and his heirs will warrant 
the land to Hugh by the said services against all men during his life. 
After the decease of Hugh the said land will revert to Richard and his 
heirs quit of the heirs of Hugh, for ever. 

(288) At Schyreburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
William le Marchaunt de Lodres and Agnes his wife, complainants, and 
Ralph de Gorges and Elena his wife, impedients, of one messuage and 
half a virgate of land in Bradepole. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned between them. Ralph and Elena acknowledged the 
messuage and land to be the right of William and Agnes, as by their 
gift. To have and to hold to William and Agnes and their heirs from 
Ralph and Elena and the heirs of Elena for ever, rendering therefor 
yearly three shillings and ^wt, pence at two terms, namely, one moiety 
at Michaelmas, and the other moiety at Easter for all service, custom 
and demand. And Ralph and Elena and the heirs of Elena will 
warrant to William and Agnes and their heirs, the said messuage and 
land by the aforesaid service against all men for ever. Should William 
die without heir begotten by him with Agnes, she surviving, the 
messuage and land shall remain to Agnes, to hold of Ralph and Elena 
and the heirs of Elena by the service aforesaid during the life of Agnes. 
After her decease the messuage and land shall revert to the right heirs 
of William, to hold of Ralph and Elena and the heirs of Elena by the 
service aforesaid for ever. For this William and Agnes gave to Ralph 
and Elena twenty marcs of silver. 

(289) At Schireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Nicholas son of Ralph de Cnolle, plaintiff, by Robert de Awelton in 
his place, and Philip de Cerne, who Elias de Deverel and Matilda his 
wife vouched to warrant and who warranted them of one carucate of 
land in Wynterburn Blancmuster. Nicholas remitted and quit claimed 
for himself and his heirs to Philip and his heirs, all his right and claim 
in the said land for ever. For this Philip gave to Nicholas forty-five 
marcs of silver. 

(290) At Schireburn, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Henry, Abbot of Bynedon, complainant, and William de Stokes 
and Alice his wife, impedients, of one mill in Burton. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. William and Alice acknow- 
ledged the mill to be the right of the Abbot and his church of Bynedon. 
To have and to hold to the Abbot, his successors and his church, of the 
chief lords of that fee in pure and perpetual alms for ever, doing there- 



41 Henry III. (1256-57). iii 

for all services which to the said mill do pertain. And the Abbot 
granted for himself and his successors and his church that henceforth 
he would find a certain monk for divine celebration for the souls of all 
the faithful in the church aforesaid for ever. 

(291) At Schyreburn, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Robert de la Chapele, complainant, and William de Mortes- 
torn, deforciant, of a moiety of the manor of Mortestorn. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. William acknowledged the 
moiety to be the right of Robert, as by his gift. To have and to hold., 
to Robert and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing 
therefor all services which to the said moiety belong. For this 
Robert gave to William one hundred shillings sterling. 

(292) At Schyreburne, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Hugh 
son of Alan Cocus, plaintiff, and Roger Cocus, tenent, of half a virgate 
of land in Lestreston. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between 
them. Hugh acknowledged the land to be the right of Roger. To have 
and to hold to Roger and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee for ever, 
doing therefor all services which to the said land belong. For this Roger 
gave to Hugh six and a half marcs of silver. 

41 Henry III. (1256-57). 

(293) At Exeter, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, between 
Joan who was the wife of Robert Buzun, complainant, and John de 
Raddune and Thomas de Veteri porite. For this matter, namely, that 
John and Thomas should acquit Joan of the services which Adam de 
Brington demanded from her in respect of the free tenement which she 
held of John and Thomas in Lasteton, and whereof John and Thomas 
who are mesnes between them ought to acquit her. And whereupon 
Joan complained that by their default she was distrained, in order to 
render yearly to Adam thirty-five shillings and seven pence for the 
tenement. Joan acknowledged and granted for herself and her heirs 
that henceforth she would acquit and defend John and Thomas and 
their heirs of the said thirty-five shillings and seven pence against 
Adam and his heirs and all other men for ever. For this John and 
Thomas granted for themselves and their heirs that henceforth they 
will render every year to Joan and her heirs thirty-five shillings and 
seven pence at Michaelmas at Chercheton in county of Devon. Should 
John and Thomas or their heirs make default in payment thereof, it 
shall be lawful for Joan and her heirs to distrain them by all their 
chatels in all their lands and tenements in Wyke and Cernwode until 
full payment shall be made of the money in arrear. 

(294) At Exeter, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Patrick de 



1 1 2 Dorset Fines. 



Chaworthes and Hawisia his wife, plaintiffs, by Walter Basset in 
Patrick's place, and Henry de Esgareston in Hawisia' s place, and 
Thomas le Rus, tenent, of two parts of one carucate of land, except 
two parts of one virgate, six acres, and two parts of a third part of one 
virgate of land in Westneweton. And between the same Patrick and 
Hawisia, plaintiffs, and the same Thomas, who Richard de Wygom' 
and Matilda his wife vouched to warrant, and who warranted to them 
a third part of one carucate of land, except a third part of one virgate, 
six acres, and a third part of a third part of one virgate of land in the 
said vill. Patrick and Hawisia acknowledged the land to be the right 
of Thomas. For this Thomas granted to Patrick and Hawisia the said 
land. To have and to hold to Patrick and Hawisia and their heirs, of 
the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing therefor all services which to 
the said land belong. If Hawisia should happen to die without heirs 
of her body begotten by Patrick, the land shall remain to Patrick and 
his heirs, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which to 
the said land do pertain for ever. Moreover Patrick and Hawisia gave 
to Thomas six score marcs of silver. 

(295) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Emericus de Truwes, plaintiff, by Adam de Bekeyate, in his place, and 
John de Burgo, who William de Apiltrefeld vouched to warrant and 
who warranted to him one hide and a half of land in Morton and one 
hide of land in Hameleswrth. Emericus acknowledged the whole of 
the land together with the advowsons of the churches of the vills afore- 
said to be the right of John and remitted and quit claimed them for 
himself and his heirs to John and his heirs for ever. For this John 
granted the whole of the land and the advowsons to William. To have 
and to hold to William and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten of 
John and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the service of half a knight's 
his fee for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And John and 
heirs will warrant the whole of the said land and advowsons to William 
and his heirs by the service aforesaid against all men for ever. If it 
should happen that William died without heir of his body lawfully 
begotten, John de Apiltrefeld brother of the said William, surviving, the 
whole of the land and the advowsons entirely shall remain to John de 
Apiltrefeld. To hold to himself and his heirs from John de Burgo and 
his heirs by the service aforesaid for ever. Moreover William gave to 
Emericus one hundred pounds sterling. 

(296) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hillary, between Beatrice, 
who was the wife of Bartholomew de Thurbervill, plaintiff, and John de 
Thurbervill who Fulco, Bishop of London vouched to warrant and who 
warranted to him a third part of the manor of Melebir' Thurbervill, which 
Beatrice claimed to be her reasonable dower which came to her in respect 



41 Henry IIL (1256-57). 113 



of the free tenement which was of Bartholomew, at one time her husband, 
in the same manor. Beatrice remitted and quit claimed for herself to 
John and his heirs all her right and claim in the said third part in name 
of dower for ever. For this John granted to Beatrice an annual rent of 
ten pounds in which the Bishop is held to John and his heirs for the 
manor aforesaid by fine made in the Court of the Lord the King between 
the same Bishop and Bartholomew father of John, whose heir he is, 
to receive yearly during her life from the hand of the Bishop and his 
heirs or from the hand of all others who afterwards shall hold the afore- 
said manor, at Michaelmas. Thus, Beatrice shall only receive for the 
term of Michaelmas 41 Henry III. sixty shillings and thenceforward 
each year she shall receive the said ten pounds at the said term of 
Michaelmas. After the death of Beatrice the said rent of ten pounds 
shall wholly revert to John and his heirs quit for ever. And the said 
Bishop, by his attorney was present, and granted this concord, and that 
he will willing attorn himself of the rent aforesaid according as is afore- 
said. If it should happen that the aforesaid Bishop or his heirs, or any 
other who afterwards shall hold the manor, shall make default in the 
payment of the said rent at any term, it shall be lawful for Beatrice 
during her life to distrain them by their chattels found in the manor 
aforesaid until full payment be made of the money in arrear for that 
term. And be it known that the Bishop aforesaid paid to Beatrice the 
said sixty shillings which he ought to pay, at Michaelmas 41 Henry III. 
(297) At Westminster, in the morrow of Souls, between Master 
Walter Scamel, complainant, and Ralph de Halleg and Sibilla his 
wife, deforciants, of one carucate of land in Poereston. Plea of covenant 
was summoned between them. Ralph and Sibilla demised and granted 
the said land to Walter. To have and to hold to Walter and his heirs 
or his assigns from the feast of the Invention of the Holy Cross in the 
forty-first year of the King's reign until the term of nine years next 
following fully to be completed, rendering therefor yearly seven marcs 
of silver at two terms, namely one moiety at the feast of the Blessed 
Mary in March, and the other moiety at the feast of the Nativity of St. 
John Baptist for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand to Ralph 
and Sibilla and the heirs of Sibilla belonging, and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of that fee for Ralph and Sibilla and the heirs of Sibilla 
all other services which to the said land do pertain. If Walter should 
happen to be alive at the end of the said term, the land shall remain to 
him, to hold of Ralph and Sibilla and the heirs of Sibilla by the 
services aforesaid during his life, and then after his death the land 
wholly shall revert to Ralph and Sibilla and the heirs of Sibilla, to 
hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which to the said land 
belong, for ever. It shall not be lawful during the term aforesaid nor 

8 



114 Dorset Fines, 

during the life of Walter or of his heirs or assigns to make waste or 
spoil of the wood, or by the vileins belonging to that land. For this 
Walter gave to Ralph and Sibilla seven marcs of silver. Be it known 
that Ralph and Sibilla and the heirs of Sibilla will warrant the land 
to Walter and his heirs or assigns by the services aforesaid until the 
end of the term aforesaid, and after the end of the term, during Walter's 
life by the services aforesaid against all men. 

(298) At Westminster, in the morrow of Souls, between Henry 
Wauger de Alveston and Alice his wife, complainants, and Cecilia de 
la Ford, impedients, of two virgates of land in the vill of la Ford and of 
Berkaleg', and one virgate of land in Newenham. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned between them. Cecilia acknowledged the whole 
of the land, together with the croft called la Brech in Berkeleg' to be 
the right of Henry and Alice, as by her gift, and remitted and quit 
claimed the same for herself and her heirs to Henry and Alice and the 
heirs of Alice for ever, to have and to hold to Henry and Alice and the 
heirs of Alice of the chief lords of those fees, doing therefor all other 
services which to the said land do pertain. For this Henry and Alice 
gave to Cecilia one hundred shillings sterling. 

{JS,ndorsed.) 
Geoffrey le Maszun and Idonea his wife put in their claim. 

(299) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of the Nativity of 
St. John Baptist, between Geoffrey de Auner, complainant, and John de 
Esseby and Katerina his wife, impedients, of twenty-nine shillings of 
rent in Uptincleden and Ilsington. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned between them. John and Katerina acknowledged the 
tenement {sic) to be the right of Geoffrey, as by their gift. To have and 
to hold to Geoffrey and his heirs from John and Katerina and the heirs 
of Katerina for ever, rendering therefor yearly one half penny at 
Pentecost upon the said tenement, and doing therefor so much royal 
service as belongs to such tenement of the same fee in the same vills 
for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And John and 
Katerina and the heirs of Katerina will warrant, acquit and defend the 
said tenement to Geoffrey and his heirs by the service aforesaid against 
all men for ever. For this Geoffrey gave to John and Katerina twenty 
and six marcs of silver. 



42 Henry III. (1257-58). 

(300) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between the 
Abbot of Bynedon, complainant, by brother John le Leiie, his monk, 
in his place, and William de Monte Acuto and Berca his wife&gt; im- 
pedients, of the manor of WestluUewrth. Plea of warranty of deed was 



42 Henry III. (1257-58). 115 

summoned between them. William and Berca acknowledged the 
manor, namely, all the lands and tenements which they before held 
in the said manor as in demesnes, hommages, rents, services, wards, 
reliefs, escheats and all other things to those lands and tenements 
belonging, to be the right of the Abbot and his church of Bynedon, as 
by their gift.' To have and to hold to the Abbot and his successors 
and his church from William and Berca and the heirs of Berca for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly in the church of Gerlington, co. Somerset, twenty 
pounds sterling at four terms, namely, one hundred shillings on the day 
of St. Thomas the Apostle, in the morrow of Palms, in the vigil of the 
Nativity of St. John Baptist, and on the day of St. Giles the Abbot, 
for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand to William and Berca 
and the heirs of Berca belonging, and doing therefor to the chief lords of 
that fee for William and Berca and the heirs of Berca all other services 
which to the said lands and tenements do pertain. And William and 
Berca and the heirs of Berca will warrant to the Abbot and his suc- 
cessors and his church, the said lands and tenements by the services 
aforesaid against all men for ever. If the Abbot or his successors make 
default in the payment of the money at any term, it shall be lawful to 
William and Berca and the heirs of Berca to distrain them by their 
chattels found on the whole manor of Westlullewrth and to drive them 
[" et ea fugari facere "] wherever it pleases them in the county of Dorset 
and there retain them until full payment of the money in arrear be made 
for that term. And likewise that the Abbot and his successors shall 
restore to them all damages and expenses which they might have by 
occasion of detaining the said money as is aforesaid. And the Abbot 
received William and Berca and the heirs of Berca into all benefices and 
orisons which henceforth would be done in his church aforesaid for ever. 
(301) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St Hillary, 
between William Bebet, complainant, and Robert de Meleburn and 
Emma Oliver his wife, impedients, of one virgate of land and one acre 
of meadow in Wynfrode. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Robert and Emma acknowledged the land and meadow 
to be the right of William, as by their gift. To have and to hold to 
William and his heirs of Robert and Emma and the heirs of Emma for 
ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of white gloves or one penny at 
Michaelmas for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand to Robert 
and Emma and the heirs of Emma belonging, and doing therefor to the 
chief lords of that fee for Robert and Emma and the heirs of Emma all 
other services which to the said land and meadow do pertain. More- 
over Robert and Emma granted for themselves and the heirs of Emma 
that William and his heirs henceforth may have yearly in the said vill ten 
pigs qait of pannage and herbage and likewise pasture for three hundred 



ii6 Dorset Fines. 



ewes with lambs (bidentes cum exitibus) without let or hindrance of the 
said Robert and Emma and the heirs of Emma or of their bailiff. And 
Robert and Emma and the heirs of Emma will warrant the said tene- 
ment to William and his heirs by the said services against all men for 
ever. For this William gave to Robert and Emma one sore sparrow 
hawk. 

(302) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Henry, 
Abbot of Bynedon, complainant, and William Hareng, impedient, of 
one virgate of land in Chandon Hareng and the advowson of the church 
of the said vill. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between 
them. William acknowledged the land and advowson to be the 
right of the Abbot and his church of Bynedon, as by the gift of 
William. To have and to hold to the Abbot and his successors and 
his church in pure and perpetual alms, and quit from all secular service 
and demand for ever. And William and his heirs will warrant acquit 
and defend the land and advowson to the Abbot and his successors and 
his church as pure and perpetual alms against all men for ever. More- 
over William remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to the 
Abbot and his successors and his church all his right and claim in a 
yearly rent of nine shillings in which the Abbot and his church were 
held yearly to pay to him for a certain tenement of the Abbot in the said 
vill of Chandon Hareng for ever. And the Abbot received William and 
his heirs into all benefits and orisons which henceforth should be done 
in his church aforesaid for ever. 

(303) At Westminster, three weeks after Easter day, between 
Clement de Blynchefeld, plaintiff, and John son of Walter de Blynche- 
feld, tenent, of one messuage and two virgates of land in Stoke. John 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Clement For this 
Clement granted it to John. To have and to hold to John for life of 
Clement and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly five shillings sterling 
at three terms, namely twenty pence at the Nativity of St. John Baptist, 
Michaelmas and the Purification of the Blessed Mary, for all service, 
custom and demand to Clement and his heirs belonging, and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Clement and his heirs all other 
services which to the said tenement belong. After the death of John 
the said tenement shall wholly revert to Clement and his heirs quit of 
the heirs of John, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which to the said tenement belong, for ever. Moreover John gave to 
Clement one marc of silver. 

43 Henry III. (1258-59). 

(304) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of Holy Trinity, 



43 Henry III. (1258-59). 117 

between Isabella daughter of Robert, Sibilla and Alienora her sisters, 
Adam Herdman and Loretta his wife, plaintiffs, by Robert le Lov in 
their place, and Geoffrey Gatelin and Joan his wife, tenents, by William 
de Raciney, in the place of Joan, of one messuage, three virgates of 
land and fifteen shillings of rent in Petrichesham. Isabella, Sibilla, 
and Alienora, Adam and Loretta acknowledged the tenement to be right 
of Joan, and remitted and quit claimed the same for themselves and the 
heirs of Isabella, Sibilla, Alienora and Loretta to Geoffrey and Joan 
and the heirs of Joan for ever. For this Geoffrey and Joan gave to 
Isabella, Sibella and Alienora Adam and Loretta two marcs of silver. 

(305) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Nicholas, Prior of the Church of Christ of Twynham, complain- 
ant, by brother William de Auton, his canon in his place, and Walter de 
Beynvill, impedient, of one hide and a half of land in Estington. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Walter acknowledged 
the land to be the right of the Prior and his church of Twynham, as by 
his gift. To have and to hold to the Prior and his successors and his 
church aforesaid of the chief lords of that fee by the services which to 
that tenement belong, for ever. And the said Prior received Walter and 
his heirs into all benefits and orisons which henceforth should be done 
in his church for ever. 

(306) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hillary, 
between Alexander, son, of Henry, complainant, and Hugh, son of Henry 
de Tholre, impedient, of the advowson of the church of Suinestholre 
and three virgates and a half, and six acres of land in Fromesfrogge 
Cherche and Suinestholre. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Hugh acknowledged the land to be the right of Alex- 
ander, as by the gift of Henry de Tholre father of Hugh whose heir he 
is. To have and to hold to Alexander and his heirs of Hugh and his 
heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one half penny at Easter, 
and doing therefor such royal service as belongs to so much land of the 
said fee in the said vill, for all service, suit of Court, action (querela) custom 
and demand. And Hugh and his heirs will warrant the land to Alexander 
and his heirs by the services aforesaid against all men for ever. More- 
over Hugh acknowledged the advowson of the aforesaid church to be 
the right of Alexander and remitted and quit claimed it for himself and 
his heirs to Alexander and his heirs for ever. For this Alexander gave 
to Hugh one marc of silver. 

(307) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Michael, 
between Nicholas de Turry, guardian of Alexander son and heir of 
Henry de Tholre, complainant, and John de Vergeley, impedient of the 
advowson of the church of Swynestholre. John acknowledged the advow- 
son of the said church to be the right of Alexander and remitted and quit 



ii8 Dorset Fines. 



claimed it for himself and and his heirs to Alexander and his heirs for 
ever. For this Nicholas gave to John half a marc of silver. 

(308) At Westminster, three weeks after Easter day, between Reginald 
de Plassetis, complainant, and Robert de Plassetis and Ela his wife, 
deforciants, of one messuage and one carucate of land in Kynstanton 
and four score acres of land in Cherletun Caunvill. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them Robert and Ela acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of Reginald, as by their gift. To have 
and to hold to Reginald during his life, of Robert and Ela and the heirs 
of Ela, rendering therefor yearly one pair of white gloves or one penny at 
the Nativity of our Lord for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand to Robert and Ela and the heirs of Ela belonging, and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of those fees for them all other services which 
to the said tenements belong. And Robert and Ela granted for them- 
selves and the heirs of Ela that all the lands and tenements which 
Alexander de Aundervill and Beatrice his wife held, in dower of Beatrice, 
in Kynstanton of the inheritance of Ela on the day this concord was 
made, which, after the death of Beatrice ought to revert to Robert and 
Ela and the heirs of Ela, should after the death of Beatrice wholly 
remain to Reginald^ to hold for life together with the aforesaid tene- 
ments of Robert and Ela and the heirs of Ela by the aforesaid services. 
And Robert and Ela and the heirs of Ela will warrant the said tene- 
ments to Reginald, which remain to him by this fine and to him shall 
revert, by the services aforesaid during Reginald's life. And after his 
death the tenements shall wholly revert to Robert and Ela and the heirs 
of Ela quit of the heirs of Reginald for ever. For this Reginald gave 
to Robert and Ela one sore sparrow hawk. 

(309) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between 
Juliana, Abbess of St. Edward of Shafton, complainant, by William de 
Lunecumbe in her place, and Robert de Columbariis and Margery his 
wife, deforciants, of six carucates of land in Candell Columbers. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. Robert and Margery 
acknowledged the six carucates to be the right of the Abbess and her 
church of Shafton and rendered them to them at the Court and remitted 
and quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of Margery to the 
Abbess and other Abbesses who should succeed her, and her church, 
for ever. For this the Abbess granted to Robert and Margery twenty 
and five librates of land in Cheselburn. To have and to hold to Robert 
and Margery of the Abbess and other Abbesses who should succeed 
her, and her church during the lives of both Robert and Margery, doing 
therefor such foreign service as belongs to so much land of the said fee 
in the said vill for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And 
the Abbess and her successors and her church will warrant to Robert 



43 Henry III. (1258-59). 119 

and Margery the said twenty five librates of land by the service afore- 
said against all men and will acquit and defend Robert and Margery 
from all manner of suits to the hundred of Whyteweye belonging, 
during the lives of both Robert and Margery. Moreover the Abbess 
granted for herself and successors and her church that henceforth she 
would render yearly to Robert and Margery during both their lives one 
hundred shillings at two terms, namely, one moiety at Michaelmas 
and the other moiety at Easter. If either of them died, then of the 
said one hundred shillings one moiety will cease. After the death of 
both, the Abbess and her successors and her church shall go quit of the 
payment of the said one hundred shillings. And the aforesaid twenty 
five librates of land in Cheselbum wholly shall revert to the Abbess 
and her successors and her church quit of the heirs of Robert and 
Margery for ever. 

(310) At Westminster, one month after Easter, between Henry de 
Sancta Barba, complainant, and Robert de Sancta Barba, deforciant, 
of one carucate of land in Longa Cheselbum. Plea of covenant was 
summoned between them. Robert acknowledged the land to be the 
right of Henry, as by the gift of Robert. For this Henry granted the 
land to Robert. To have and to hold to Robert of Henry and his heirs 
during Robert's life, rendering therefor yearly one penny at Michaelmas 
for all service, custom and demand belonging to Henry and his heirs, 
and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Henry and his heirs 
all other services which to the said land do pertain. After the death 
of Robert the land wholly shall revert to Henry and his heirs quit of 
the heirs of Robert, to hold from the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which to the said land do pertain for ever. 

(311) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hillary, between 
Robert, the Dean, and the Chapter of Salisbury, complainants, by Adam 
de Monte Forti in their place, and Symon, Prior of Brunmore, 
deforciant, of five marcs which are in arrear to the Dean and Chapter 
from a rent of ten marcs which he owes to them. The Prior acknow- 
ledged and granted for himself and his successors and his church of 
Brummore that henceforth he would render the yearly rent of ten marcs 
to them at Salisbury at two terms, namely one moiety at Easter, and 
the other moiety at Michaelmas. For this the Dean and Chapter 
remitted and quit claimed for themselves and their successors to the 
Prior and his successors and his church all the arrears and all the 
damages which they said they had by reason of the witholding of the 
said rent until the day this concord was made. If the Prior or his 
successors or his church should at any term make default in the pay- 
ment of the rent, it shall be lawful for the Dean and Chapter and their 
successors to distrain them by their chattels wherever they shall be 



I20 Dorset Fines. 



found in their tenements in the county of Dorset until full payment of 
the rent so in arrear for that term. 



44 Henry III. (1259^). 

(312) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hillary, 
between Matilda, Abbess ** de loco Regine super Tharente," complain- 
ant, by William Bizun in her place, and Henry de Novo Burgo, for 
this, namely, that Henry should acquit her of the service which the 
Abbess of St Edward of Schefton demands from her in respect of the 
free tenement which Matilda holds of Henry in Gyssich St. Andrew, 
namely, the homage and whole service of Roger de Pulbyk and his 
heirs for all the tenements which he holds in the said vill and in 
Burton and whereof Matilda complained that by Henry's default she 
was distrained to do to the Abbess of St. Edward the service of two 
knights, except such service as belongs to one hide of land in the vill 
of Gyssich for the tenement aforesaid, and whereof Henry who is 
mesne between them ought to acquit her. Henry acknowledged the 
homage and whole service of Roger and his heirs for the tenements 
aforesaid to be the right of Matilda and her church **de loco Regine," 
as by his gift. To have and to hold to the Abbess '* de loco Regine " 
and other Abbesses who should succeed her, and her church, of Henry 
and his heirs in pure and perpetual alms, free and quit from all secular 
service, suits of Court, custom and demand for ever. And Henry and 
his heirs will warrant to the Abbess "de loco Regine" and her 
successors and her church, the said homage and whole service of Roger 
and his heirs for the tenements aforesaid as free and perpetual alms 
against all men for ever. Moreover Henry acknowledged and granted 
for himself and his heirs that henceforth he will not give, sell, pledge 
nor in any other manner alien his manor of Wynfrode which he held 
on the day this concord was made, by doing which he and his heirs and 
all others who hereafter shall hold the said manor, would not be able to 
warrant and defend to the Abbess " de loco Regine " and her successors 
and her church the homage and service of Roger and his heirs and 
all the tenements which Roger held of the said Abbess in the vills afore- 
said on the day aforesaid. And the Abbess " de loco Regine " received 
Henry and his heirs into all benefits and orisons which henceforth 
should be done in her church for ever. 

(313) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between 
Nicholas de Mordon, plaintiff, and Geoffrey de Aune, tenent, of forty 
acres of land in Elsinton and Holetincleden. Nicholas remitted and 
quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Geoffrey and his heirs all right 
and claim in the said land for ever. For this Geoffrey, at the instance 



44 Henry III. (1259-60). 121 



of Nicholas, granted to the Prior of Christ's church of Tvynham twenty 
acres of the said land lying between the limits of Elsinton. To have 
and to hold to the Prior and his successors and his church aforesaid of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which to those twenty acres 
belong, for ever. 

(314) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Peter de Buwude, complainant, and Robert de Leucumbe and 
Margery his wife, deforciants, of one messuage and one virgate of land 
in Buwude. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. Robert 
and Margery remitted and quit claimed for themselves to Peter and his 
heirs all their right in the tenement by name of dower for ever. For 
this Peter gave to Robert and Margery forty marcs of silver. 

(315) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, 
between Richard de Buggesgate and Isabella his wife, complainants, 
and Adam de Buggesgate and Emma his wife, deforciants, of one 
messuage and half a virgate of land in Thornhell, half a virgate of land 
in Kyngeston, and half a virgate of land in Pytrigesham. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. Adam and Emma acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of Richard and Isabella, as by the 
gift of Adam and Emma. To have and to hold to Richard and Isabella 
and their heirs of Adam and Emma and the heirs of Emma for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, custom 
and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of those fees for 
Adam and Emma and the heirs of Emma all other services which to 
the said tenements do pertain. And Adam and Emma and the heirs 
of Emma will warrant to Richard and Isabella and the heirs of Richard 
the tenements aforesaid by the services aforesaid against all men for 
ever. Should Isabella die without heirs by Richard, he surviving, the 
said tenements wholly shall remain to him, to hold of Adam and Emma 
and the heirs of Emma by the services aforesaid during his life, and 
then after his decease the tenements wholly shall revert to Adam and 
Emma and the heirs of Emma quit, to hold of the chief lords of those 
fees by the services which to the said tenements belong, for ever. For 
this Richard and Isabella gave to Adam and Emma one sore sparrow 
hawk. 

(316) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist, between Ralph de Gorges and Elena his wife, complainants, 
by Thomas de Clyve in their place, and William de Wysford and 
Isabella his wife, impedients, of one hide of land in Neuton. Plea of 
warranty of deed was sunynoned between them. William and Isabella 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Ralph and Elena, as by their 
gift. To have and to hold to Ralph and Elena and the heirs of Ralph 
of William and Isabella and the heirs of Isabella for ever, rendering 



122 Dorset Fines. 

therefor yearly one penny at Michaelmas for all service, suit of Court, 
custom and demand. And William and Isabella and the heirs of 
Isabella will warrant to Ralph and Elena and the heirs of Ralph the 
said land by the said service against all men for ever. For this Ralph 
and Elena gave to William and Isabella thirty-one marcs of silver. 

(317) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Apostles Symon and 
Jude, between William de Punsond, plaintiff, and William Martel, who 
Thomas Belet vouched to warrant and who warranted to him, a moiety 
of one knight's fee in Wynterburn Stupilton. William de Punsond 
acknowledged the land to be the right of William Martel. For this 
William Martel at the instance of William de Punsond granted to 
Thomas the said land. To have and to hold to Thomas and the heirs 
of his body of William Martel and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the 
service of half a knight's fee for all service, custom and demand. 
Should Thomas die without heir of his body, then the land wholly shall 
remain to William de Punsond and the heirs of his body, to hold of 
William Martel and his heirs by the service aforesaid for ever. Should 
William de Punsond die without heir of his body, then the land wholly 
shall revert to the right heirs of Thomas, to hold of William Martel and 
his heirs by the services aforesaid for ever. And William Martel and his 
heirs will warrant to Thomas and his heirs, or to William de Punsond 
and the heirs of his body, if Thomas died without heirs of his body 
as is aforesaid, the said land by the said service against all men for 
ever. Moreover William Martel and Thomas gave to William de 
Punsond fifty marcs of silver. 

(318) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between Laurence de Cumpton, complainant, and William, Prior of 
Bradenestok, imped ient, by Robert de Kelmerdon, in his place, of three 
virgates of land, and four acres of wood in Lillingtone. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. The Prior acknow- 
ledged the tenement to be the right of Laurence, as by his gift. To 
have and to hold to Laurence and his heirs of the Prior and his suc- 
cessors and his church of Bradenestok for ever, rendering therefor 
yearly at Bradenestok twenty shillings at two terms, namely, one moiety 
at Michaelmas and the other moiety at Easter for all service, custom 
and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for the 
Prior and his successors and his church all other services which to the 
tenement belong. And the Prior and his successors will warrant to 
Laurence and his heirs the said tenement by the services aforesaid 
against all men for ever. For this Laurence gave to the Prior one 
sparrow hawk. 

45 Henry IIL (I26a6i). 

(319) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist^ 



46 Henry IIL (1261-62). 123 

between Ralph de Nymet, complainant, and Roger de Anesey and 
Albreda his wife, deforciants, of one carucate of land in Heremaunseya. 
Plea of covenant was summoned between them. Roger and Albreda 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Ralph, as by their gift. To have 
and to hold to Ralph and his heirs of Roger and Albreda and the heirs 
of Albreda for ever, rendering therefor yearly twelve pence, and one 
pound of wax at two terms, namely, twelve pence at Easter, and one 
pound of wax at Michaelmas for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand. And Roger and Albreda and the heirs of Albreda will 
warrant the said land to Ralph and his heirs by the service aforesaid 
against all men for ever. For this Ralph gave to Roger and Albreda 
forty marcs of silver. 



46 Henry III. (1261-62). 

(320) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Robert de Clerebek, plaintiff, and Baldewyn * , Earl of Devon, 
who Amicia, Countess of Devon, vouched to warrant, and who war- 
ranted to her one messuage, one carucate and half of land, and five 
marcs rent in Childehokeford. The Earl acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of Robert. For this Robert at the instance of the Earl 
granted the said tenement to the Countess. To have and to hold to 
the Countess of Robert and his heirs during her life, rendering therefor 
yearly four marcs at two terms, namely one moiety at the Nativity of 
our Lord, and the other moiety at the Nativity of St. John Baptist for 
all service, custom and demand. And Robert and his heirs will warrant 
the tenement to the Countess by the service aforesaid against all men 
during her life. After the death of the Countess the' tenement wholly 
will revert to Robert and his heirs quit of the heirs of the Countess, to 
hold of the Earl and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the service of one 
knight's fee for all service, custom and demand. And the Earl and his 
heirs will warrant the tenement to Robert and his. heirs by the service 
aforesaid against all men for ever. Be it known that Robert did 
homage at the said court to the Earl for the tenement. 

(321) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, 
between Edward de Wlfreton, complainant, and Robert de la Bruere 
and Joan his wife, impedients, of one messuage and the fourth part of 
one virgate of land in Wlfreton. Plea of warranty of deed was sum- 
moned between them. Robert and Joan acknowledged the tenement to 
be the right of Edward, as by their gift. To have and to hold to 
Edward and his heirs of Robert and Joan and the heirs of Joan for ever, 

* Piece of the document torn off. 



1^4 Dorset Fines, 



rendering therefor yearly one pair of white gloves or one half-penny at 
Easter for all service, custom and demand, and doing therefor to the 
chief lords of that fee for Robert and Joan and the heirs of Joan all other 
services which to the said tenement belong. And Robert and Joan and 
the heirs of Joan will warrant the tenement to Edward and his heirs 
by the services aforesaid against all men for ever. For this Edward 
gave to Robert and Joan fifteen marcs of silver. 

(322) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Michael, between 
Matilda, Abbess '* de loco Regine," of Tarente, complainant, by William 
Buzun in her place, and John de Turbervill, deforciant, of the manors 
of Wynterburn Turbervill, Colbere, Stock, Tolre and Ringsted. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. The Abbess acknowledged 
the manors, as in demesnes, homages, services of free men,' vileinages, 
wards, reliefs and escheats, woods, meadows, pastures and all other 
things to the said manors belonging to be the right of John. For this 
John granted to the Abbess and her church **de loco Regine " the 
aforesaid manors as is aforesaid. To have and to hold to the Abbess 
and other Abbesses who should succeed her, and her church, of John 
and his heirs in pure and perpetual alms free and quit from all secular 
service and demand for ever. And John and his heirs will warrant the 
manors to the Abbess and her successors and her church as is aforesaid, 
as her free, pure and perpetual alms without doing any other service 
therefor, against all men for ever. And the Abbess received John and 
his heirs into all and singular benefits and orisons which henceforth 
should be done in her church for ever. 

(323) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hillary, between Giles, 
Bishop of Salisbury, complainant, by Henry Snov in his place, and 
William de Legh, impedient, by John Scubert in his place, of two acres 
of land in Alingeton and the advowson of the church of the same vill. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. William 
acknowledged the land and advowson to be the right of the Bishop, as 
by his gift. To have and to hold to the Bishop and his heirs of 
William and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one clove 
gillyflower at Easter for all service, custom and demand. And William 
and his heirs will warrant to the Bishop and his heirs the said land 
and advowson by the service aforesaid against all men for ever. For 
this the Bishop gave to William one sore sparrow hawk. 

(324) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Roger Bunel, complainant, and Andrew de Tatton and Agnes, his 
wife, deforciants, of one virgate of land and one acre of meadow in 
Tatton. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. Roger 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Agnes. For this Andrew 
and Agnes granted it to Roger. To have and to hold to Roger of 



46 Henry IIL (1261-62). 125 

Andrew and Agnes and the heirs of Agnes, during his life, rendering 
therefor yearly one pound of cumin and two pence at Michaelmas for 
all service, custom and demand. And Andrew and Agnes and the heirs 
of Agnes will warrant the tenement to Roger by the services aforesaid 
against all men during his life. After the death of Roger the tenement 
wholly shall revert to Andrew and Agnes and the heirs of Agnes quit 
of the heirs of Roger, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which to that tenement do pertain for ever. Moreover Roger gave to 
Andrew and Agnes eleven marcs of silver. 

(325) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, 
between John de Brochampton, complainant, and Walter de Brochamp- 
ton, impedient, of twenty nine acres and one half of land in Brochamp- 
ton. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Walter 
acknowledged the land to be the right of John, as by the gift of Walter. 
To have and to hold to John and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which to that land do pertain for ever. For this John 
granted for himself and his heirs that henceforth he would render yearly 
to Walter, during Walter's life, forty shillings at two terms, namely, 
one moiety at Easter, and the other moiety at Michaelmas. And after 
the death of Walter, John and his heirs shall be quit of the payment of 
the money aforesaid for ever. 

(^Endorsed,) And Richard son of Richard de Brokhampton put in 
his claim. 

(326) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Nicholas de Andovere, complainant, and Thomas Kaynel and Joan his 
wife and Robert de Camera and Amicia his wife, deforciants, of one 
messuage and one virgate of land in Lyceministre. Plea of covenant 
was summoned between them. Thomas and Joan and Robert and 
Amicia acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Nicholas, and 
remitted and quit claimed the same to him and his heirs to them and 
the heirs of Joan and Amicia for ever. For this Nicholas gave to 
Thomas and Joan and Robert and Amicia eight marcs of silver. 

(327) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Roger Swope, complainant, and Vincent de Haukeschurche 
and Edith his wife, impedients, of five acres of land in Blaneford St. 
Mar&gt;'. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Vin- 
cent and Edith acknowledged the land to be the right of Roger, as by 
their gift. To have and to hold to Roger and his heirs of Vincent and 
Edith and the heirs of Edith for ever, rendering therefor yearly one 
penny at Easter for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And 
Vincent and Edith and the heirs of Edith will warrant the land to 
Roger and his heirs by the said service against all men for ever. For 
this Roger gave to Vincent and Edith sixty shillings sterling. 



126 Dorset Fines. 



47 Henry III. (1262-63). 

(328) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, be- 
tween Emelina who was the wife of Stephen Lungespeye, plaintiff, by 
Nicholas de Wycke, in her place, and Juliana, Abbess of Shaftebyr*, 
tenent, by Reginald Patyn, in her place, of one messuage and ^\^ 
carucates of land, except six acres of land and pasture for eight cattle 
in Purscaule. Emelina acknowledged the messuage and land, except 
the aforesaid six acres and pasture, to be the right of the Abbess and 
her church of St. Edward of Shaftebyr, and remitted and quit claimed 
the same for herself and her heirs to the Abbess and other Abbesses 
who should succeed her, and her church for ever. And the Abbess 
received Emelina and her heirs into all benefits and orisons which 
henceforth should be done in her church for ever. 

No fines for 48 or ^g- Henry III. (1263-65). 

SO Henry III. (1265-66). 

(329) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hillary, 
between Henry Gylleyn, complainant, and William Germeyn and Alice 
his wife, impedients, of eighteen acres of land in Dorcestr*. Henry 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Alice. For this William and 
Alice granted the said land to Henry. To have and to hold to Henry 
for life, of William and Alice and the heirs of Alice, rendering therefor 
yearly one pound of cumin at Michaelmas for all service, custom and 
demand. And William and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant 
the said land to Henry by the service aforesaid against all men, during 
the life of Henry. After his death the land wholly shall remain to 
Thomas de Chiltecumbe and his heirs, to hold of William and Alice 
and the heirs of Alice by the service aforesaid for ever. 

(Endorsed.) And the King's bailiffs of Dorcestr* put in their claim. 

(330) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Henry, 
son of Elyas, complainant, and John Peytevyn and Florence his wife, 
impedients, of one messuage, one virgate and a half of land in Cherle- 
ton juxta Wymburn. John and Florence acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of Henry, as by their gift. To have and to hold to 
Henry and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
to that tenement belong for ever. For this Henry gave to John and 
Florence thirty-six marcs of silver. 

(331) At Westminster, in the octaves of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between John de Manyngeford and Jocea his wife, 
complainants, by the aforesaid John in the place of Jocea, and Vincent 
de Hauckeschirche and Edith his wife, deforciants, of one messuage. 



52 Henry IIL (1267-68). 127 

seventeen acres and a half of land one acre and a half of pasture and 
two pence of rent in Blaneford St. Mary. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned between them, Vincent and Edith acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of John and Jocea, as by their gift, and remitted and 
quit claimed the same for themselves and the heirs of Edith to John and 
Jocea and the heirs of John for ever. For this John and Jocea gave to 
Vincent and Edith ten marcs of silver. 

(332) At Westminster, in the octaves of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Robert le Neweman, complainant, and Vincent 
de Hauckeschirche and Edith his wife, impedients, of one mill and 
seven acres of land in Wereghrode and Warham. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned between them. Vincent and Edith acknowledged 
the mill and land to be the right of Robert, as by their gift. To have 
and to hold to Robert and his heirs of Vincent and Edith and the heirs 
of Edith for ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for 
all service, custom and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of 
those fees for Vincent and Edith and the heirs of Edith all other ser- 
vices. And Vincent and Edith and the heirs of Edith will warrant the 
mill and land to Robert and his heirs by the service aforesaid against 
all men for ever. For this Robert gave to Vincent and Edith one hun- 
dred shillings sterling. 



51 Heniy IIL (1266^). 

(333) ^^ Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hillary, 
between Henry de Haddpn, complainant, and John de Antioch, im- 
pedient, of one messuage and one carucate of land in Stapelbrigg. 
John acknowledged the tenement and whatever henceforth could come 
to him by occasion of the same tenement, within the manor of Stapil- 
brigge, to be the right of Henry, as by the gift and grant of John. To 
have and to hold to Henry and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which to that tenement belong for ever. For this Henry 
gave to John forty marcs of silver. 



52 Henry III. (1267-68). 

(334) At Schyreburn, ^v^ weeks after the day of Easter, be- 
tween Roger le Ferur and Joan his wife, and Roger, son of Hamo de 
Burton, plaintiffs, and Simon Joyval and Matilda his wife, tenents, of 
two messuages in Dorecestr*. Roger le Ferur and Joan and Roger son 
of Hamo acknowledged the two messuages, namely those two messu- 
ages of which one lies between the messuage of Thomas Crubbe and 



128 Dorset Fines, 



the messuage of William Red, and the other lies between the messuage 
of William de Aune and the messuage of Nicholas Baryll, to be the 
right of Simon and Matilda, and remitted and quit claimed the same 
for themselves and the heirs of Joan to Simon and Matilda and the 
heirs of Matilda for ever. For this Simon and Matilda, at the in- 
stance of Roger le Ferur and Joan and Roger son of Hamo, granted to 
Cristiana daughter of Roger de Aune the said messuages. To have and 
to hold to Cristiana and her heirs of Simon and Matilda and the heirs 
of Matilda for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the feast of 
the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, suit of Court, custom 
and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Simon 
and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda all other services which to the 
said messuages belong. And Simon and Matilda and the heirs of 
Matilda will warrant the messuages to Cristiana and her heirs by the 
services aforesaid against all men for ever. Moreover Cristiana gave 
to Simon and Matilda, Roger le Ferur and Joan, and Roger son of 
Hamo eleven marcs of silver. 

(335) At Oxford, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between William 
son of Walter, plaintiff, and Richard Payn and Avicia his wife, tenents, 
of two parts of the manor of Chartreston, except one virgate and a half 
of land in the said manor. William acknowledged the two parts, 
together with the said one virgate and a half of land, that is to say, the 
whole of the manor of Chartreston to be the right of Richard and Avicia, 
and remitted and quit claimed the same for himself and his heirs to 
Richard and Avicia and the heirs of Avicia for ever. For this Richard 
and Avicia gave to William twenty five marcs of silver. 

(336) At Oxford, three weeks after the day of St. John Baptist, between 
brother Roger de Veer, Prior of the hospital of St. John of Jerusalem in 
England, complainant, and Peter de la Dene and Juliana his wife, im- 
pedients, of one messuage and three virgates of land in Radesloe. Plea 
of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Peter and Juliana 
acknowledged the messuage and land to be the right of the Prior and of 
the hospital, as by their gift. To have and to hold to the Prior and 
his successors, brothers of the said hospital in free, pure and perpetual 
alms for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the feast of the 
Nativity of St. John Baptist, for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand to Peter and Juliana and the heirs of Juliana belonging, and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Peter and Juliana and 
the heirs of Juliana all other services which to the said messuage and 
land do pertain. And Peter and Juliana and the heirs of Juliana will 
warrant to the Prior and his successors, brothers of the said hospital 
and to the hospital the said messuage and land as their free and 
perpetual alms against all men for ever. And the Prior received Peter 



52 Henry III, (1267-68). 129 

and Juliana and the heirs of Juliana into all benefits and orisons which 
henceforth should be done in the hospital aforesaid for ever. 

(337) At Oxford, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between Philip 
Harang, complainant, and Bartholomew de Brygge and Emma his wife, 
deforciants, of one message and two carucates of land in Langeton and 
the advowson of the church. Plea of covenant was summoned between 
them. Bartholomew and Emma acknowledged the tenement and 
advowson to be the right of Philip. To have and to hold to Philip and 
his heirs of Bartholomew and Emma during both their lives, rendering 
therefor yearly, one penny at Easter for all service, suit of Court, 
custom and demand during the lives of Bartholomew and Emma, but 
after their deaths of the chief lords of that fee by the services which to 
that tenement do pertain for ever. And Bartholomew and Emma will 
warrant the tenement and advowson to Philip and his heirs by the 
service aforesaid against all men, during their lives. For this Philip 
granted to Bartholomew and Emma the manor of Wynterburn Harang, 
as in demesnes, homages, rents, services of free men, vileinages, with 
vileins holding those vileinages, wards, reliefs, escheats and all other 
things to the said manor pertaining. To have and to hold to Bar- 
tholomew and Emma of Philip and his heirs, during the lives of 
Bartholomew and Emma, rendering therefor yearly one pair of white 
gloves, or one penny at Easter for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Philip and 
his heirs all other services which to the said manor belong. And Philip 
and his heirs will warrant the manor to Bartholomew and Emma during 
their lives by the services aforesaid against all men. And after their 
deaths the manor shall wholly revert to Philip and his heirs quit for 
ever. And be it known that it shall not be lawful for Bartholomew 
and Emma to give, sell, pledge, or in any other way alien the said 
manor, nor make waste, sale or spoil thereof, by doing which after 
their deaths it should not wholly revert to Philip and his heirs quit of 
the heirs of Bartholomew and Emma for ever. Moreover Philip at the 
instance of Bartholomew and Emma granted to Nicholas Harang one 
messuage and one virgate of land in Wynterburn Harang. To have 
and to hold to Nicholas and the heirs of his body of Philip and his 
heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all 
service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And Philip and his heirs 
will warrant the said messuage and land to Nicholas and the heirs of 
his body by the services aforesaid against all men for ever. If it should 
happen that Nicholas died without heirs of his body, then the messuage 
and land wholly would revert to Philip and his heirs quit of the other 
heirs of Nicholas, for ever. 

(338) At Ivelcestr', fifteen days after the day of the Purification of 

9 



130 Dorset Fines, 



the Blessed Mary, between Robert Martin, complainant, and Nicholas 
son of Martin, impedient, of a knight's fee in Pydele Waltereston, one 
messuage and two carucates of land in Puleyneston. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Nicholas acknowledged ^e 
tenements to be the right of Robert, as by the gift of Nicholas. To 
have and to hold to Robert and the heirs of his body of Nicholas and 
his heirs for ever, doing therefor all other services which to the same 
tenements belong. And Nicholas and his heirs will warrant and defend 
the tenements to Robert and the heirs of his body by the services 
aforesaid against all men for ever. Should Robert die without heirs of 
his body, then the tenements wholly remain to William Martin, brother 
of Robert and the heirs of his body, to hold of Nicholas and his heirs 
by the services which to the said tenements belong for ever. Should 
William die without heirs of his body, the tenements wholly remain to 
David brother of Robert and William and the heirs of his body, to hold 
of Nicholas and his heirs by the services which to the said tenements 
belong for ever. Should David die without heirs of his body, the 
tenements wholly remain to Warin Martin, brother of Robert, William 
and David and the heirs of his body, to hold of Nicholas and his heirs 
by the services which to the said tenements belong for ever. Should 
Warin die without heirs of his body, then all the said tenements wholly 
revert to Nicholas and his heirs, to hold of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which to the said tenements belong, quit, for ever. 
And Nicholas and his heirs will warrant all the tenements aforesaid to 
William, David and Warin and their heirs by the services aforesaid 
against all men for ever. For this Robert gave to Nicholas one sore 
sparrow hawk, 

(339) At Schyrebum, five weeks after Easter day, between Philip, 
Abbot of Cerne, complainant, and Hugh de Werdesford, deforciant, of 
one messuage and one carucate of land in Estwerdesford. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. Hugh acknowledged the 
messuage and land, as in demesnes, homages, rents, services of free 
men, advowson of the church of the said vill, vileinages, with vileins 
holding those vileinages, wards, reliefs, escheats, meadows, turbary, 
pasture and all other things to the said messuage and land belonging, 
to be the right of the Abbot and his church of St. Peter of Cerne. For 
this the Abbot granted to Hugh the messuage and land, except the 
advowson, four acres of meadow nearest to the water course of Palynton, 
the homages, rents, services of free men, wards, reliefs and escheats. 
To have and to hold to Hugh for his life, of the Abbot and his 
successors and his church, rendering therefor yearly one penny at 
Easter for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And the 
Abbot and his successors and his church will warrant the messuages 



52 Henry II L (1267-68). 131 

and land to Hugh for his life by the service aforesaid, as is aforesaid, 
against all men. And after Hugh's death the messuages and land 
wholly shall revert to the Abbot and his successors and his church quit 
of the heirs of Hugh for ever. And be it known that it shall not be 
lawful for H*gh to give, sell, pledge, or in any other way alien the 
said messuage and land nor make waste, sale or spoil thereof, by doing 
which they should not wholly revert to the Abbot and his successors 
and his church, quit of the heirs of Hugh, as is aforesaid, for ever. 
(Endorsed.) John de Werdesford put in his claim. 

(340) At Schyrborn, five weeks after Easter day, between Geoffrey, 
son of Gunnilda de Castro de Schyrborn, complainant, and Ernisius 
de Pydevill and Alice his wife, impedients, of one messuage and half 
a virgate of land in Alpheston. Plea of warranty of deed was sum- 
moned between them. Ernisius and Alice acknowledged the messuage 
and land to be the right of Geoffrey, as by their gift. To have and to 
hold to Geoffrey and his heirs of Ernisius and Alice and the heirs of 
Alice for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the feast of the 
Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Ernisius 
and Alice and the heirs of Alice all other services which to the said 
messuage and land belong. And Ernisius and Alice and the heirs of 
Alice will warrant the messuage and land to Geoffrey and his heirs by 
the services aforesaid against all men for ever. For this Geoffrey gave 
to Ernisius and Alice nine marcs of silver. 

(341) At Schyreburn, five weeks after Easter day, between Robert 
de Wuborn, complainant, and Robert Padel and Agnes his wife, im- 
pedients, of one messuage in Schyreburn. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned between them. Robert Padel and Agnes acknowledged 
the messuage to be the right of Robert de Wuborn, as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to Robert de Wuborn and his heirs of Robert 
Padel and Agnes and the heirs of Agnes for ever, rendering therefor 
yearly one clove gillyflower at Easter for all service, suit of Court, 
custom and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee 
for Robert Padel and Agnes and the heirs of Agnes all other services 
which to the said messuage belong. And Robert Padel and Agnes 
and the heirs of Agnes will warrant the messuage to Robert de Wuborn 
and his heirs by the services aforesaid against all men. For this 
Robert de Wuborn gave to Robert Padel and Agnes ten marcs of 
silver. 

(342) At Wilton, in the octaves of St. Hillary, between Roger de 
Purebik, complainant, and Alice daughter of Robert de Purebek, de- 
forciant, of one messuage and three carucates of land in Gissiche St, 
Andrew. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. Alice 



132 Dorset Fines, 



acknowledged the messuage and three carucates of lands as in de- 
mesnes, homages, rents, services, reliefs, wards, escheats, vileinages, 
woods, meadows, pastures, ways, waters, ponds, mills and all things 
to the said messuage and land belonging, to be the right of Roger, and 
remitted and quit claimed the same for herself and her heirs to Roger 
and his heirs for ever. For this Roger gave to Alice forty pounds 
sterling. 

(343) At Rading, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Geoffrey 
de Cerne, plaintiff, and Herbert de Sancto Quintino, tenent, of one 
messuage and two virgates of land in Lytlefrome. Assize of mort 
ancestor was summoned between them. Herbert acknowledged the 
tenement to be the right of Geoffrey. For this Geoffrey, at the instance 
of Robert son of Pagan, granted to Herbert the said tenement. To 
have and to hold to Herbert and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which to that tenement belong for ever. Moreover 
Herbert gave to Geoffrey forty shillings sterling. 

(344) At Rading, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, between 
Richard de Russeden, parson of the church of Weston, complainant, 
and John de Treberge and Muriella his wife, for this matter, namely, 
that John and Muriella should permit Richard to have common of 
pasture in Westone which belongs to his free tenement in that vill. 
Richard acknowledged the common of pasture to be the right of John 
and Muriella and remitted and quit claimed the same for himself and 
his successors and his church, to John and Muriella and the heirs of 
Muriella for ever. For this John and Muriella granted to Richard two 
and a half acres of separable (separabilis) pasture in a close of John 
and Muriella in Eldeber, namely those two acres and a half which 
lie between the pasture of John and Muriella and the pasture which 
once was of William de Gudmanston. To have and to hold to Richard 
and his successors, parsons of the said church, and his church of John 
and Muriella and the heirs of Muriella in free, pure and perpetual alms 
for ever. And John and Muriella and the heirs of Muriella will warrant 
the separable (separabilis) pasture to Richard and his successors and 
his church, as pure and perpetual alms quit without doing any secular 
service therefor for ever. This concord was made in the presence of 
Walter, Bishop of Salisbury, the Diocesan of the place and also of 
John and Muriella, patrons of the aforesaid church, they agreeing 
thereto. 

(345) At Schyreburn, fifteen days after Easter day, between Roger 
Sope and Mabilia his wife, complainants, and Vincent de Haucke- 
cherche and Edith his wife, impedients, of one messuage, twenty four 
acres of land, and one acre of meadow in Blaneford St. Mary. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Vincent and Edith 



52 Henry III. (1267-68). 133 



acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Roger and Mabilia, as by 
the gift of Vincent and Edith. To have and to hold to Roger and 
Mabilia and the heirs of Mabilia of Vincent and Edith and the heirs 
of Edith for ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at the feast of 
St. Michael for all service^ suit of Court, custom and demand. And 
Vincent and Edith and the heirs of Edith will warrant the said tene- 
ment to Roger and Mabilia and the heirs of Mabilia by the service 
aforesaid against all men for ever. For this Roger and Mabilia gave 
to Vincent and Edith one sore sparrow hawk. 

{Endorsed.) John de Mauniggeford put in his claim. 

(346) At Schyreburn, one month after Easter day, between John 
de Gostle, complainant, and Thomas Langage and Emma his wife, 
deforciants, of one virgate of land, except one messuage and one acre 
of land in Loscumbe. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. 
Thomas and Emma acknowledged the land, except the messuage and 
one acre of land, to be the right of John, as by their gift. To have and 
to hold to John and his heirs of Thomas and Emma and the heirs of 
Emma for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the feast of the 
Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand. And Thomas and Emma and the heirs of Emma will warrant 
the said land to John and his heirs by the service aforesaid against all 
men for ever. For this John gave to Thomas and Emma five marcs 
of silver. 

(347) At Schyreburn, seven weeks after Easter day, between John 
le Breton and Beatrice his wife, complainants, and John le Punter, 
deforciant, of three acres of land in La Bere. Plea of covenant was 
summoned between them. John le Punter acknowledged the land to 
be the right of John and Beatrice, as by his gift. To have and to 
hold to John and Beatrice and the heirs of John of John le Punter 
and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the feast 
of the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, suit of Court, custom 
and demand. And John le Punter and his heirs will warrant the said 
land to John le Bretun and Beatrice and the heirs of John, by the 
service aforesaid against all men for ever. For this John and Beatrice 
granted to John le Punter three acres of land which lie towards the east 
in the field of la Bere. To have and to hold to John le Punter and his 
heirs of John and Beatrice and the heirs of John le Bretun for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one clove gillyflower at Easter for all service, 
suit of Court, custom and demand. And John le Breton and Beatrice 
and the heirs of John will warrant the said land to John le Punter and 
his heirs by the service aforesaid against all men for ever. 

(348) At Schyreburn, five weeks after Easter day, between Robert son 
of Ivo, plaintiff, and Nicholas le Clerke, tenent, of one messuage and 



134 Dorset Fines, 



four bovates of land in Vlejjuu. In ichoLi^i acknowledged the niessa.ij;c 
and land to be the right of Robert and rendered the same to him at the 
Court, and remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Robert 
and his heirs for ever. F'or this Robert, at the instance of Nicholas, 
granted to Robert de la Putte a moiety of the aforesaid messuage and 
land. To have and to hold to Robert de la Putte and his heirs of 
Robert son of Ivo and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly 
one clove gillyflower at Easter for all service, suit of Court, custom 
and demand. And Robert son of Ivo and his heirs will warrant the 
said moiety to Robert de la Putte and his heirs by the service afore- 
said against all men for ever. Moreover, Robert son of Ivo gave to 
Nicholas one hundred shillings sterling. 

(349) At Schyreburn, seven weeks after Easter day, between John 
le Breton and Beatrice his wife, complainants, and Ralph le Careter 
and Alice his wife, impedients, of one messuage, one virgate of land 
and four acres of meadow in Hakeford Eskellyng. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Ralph and Alice acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of John and Beatrice, as by the gift of 
Ralph and Alice. To have and to hold to John and Beatrice and the 
heirs of John of Ralph and Alice and the heirs of Alice for ever, render- 
ing therefor yearly one rose at the feast of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And Ralph 
and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant the tenement to John and 
Beatrice and the heirs of John by the said service against all men for 
ever. For this John and Beatrice gave to Ralph and Alice nineteen 
marcs of silver. 

(350) At Schyreburn, five weeks after Easter day, between William 
Bugle, plaintiff, and William, Abbot of Myddelton, who Matilda, who 
was the wife of Roger de la Lee, vouched to warrant, and who warranted 
to her one messuage and one carucate of land in Dudleshey. William 
le Bugle (sic) acknowledged the messuage and land to be the right of 
the Abbot and his church of St. Mary of Myddelton, and remitted and 
quit claimed the same for himself and his heirs to the Abbot and his 
successors and his church aforesaid for ever. Moreover William remitted 
and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to the Abbot and his successors 
and his church aforesaid all his right and claim in two virgates of land 
which Alice Bonepart held in Brodesidelinge on the day this concord 
was made for ever. For this the Abbot granted to William and Agnes 
his wife one messuage and one virgate of land which Walter Bercarius 
held in Chelmington on the day this concord was made. To have and 
to hold to William and Agnes of the Abbot and his successors and his 
church during their lives, rendering therefor yearly one penny at 
Easter for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And the 



52 Henry II L (1267-68). 135 

Abbot and his successors and his church will warrant the messuage 
and land to William and Agnes by the aforesaid services against all 
men during their lives. After their deaths the messuage and land 
wholly shall revert to the Abbot and his successors and his church quit 
of his heirs of William and Agnes for ever. Be it known that it shall 
not be lawful for William and Agnes to give, sell, pledge, or in any 
other way alien the said messuage and land, nor make waste sale or 
spoil thereof, by doing which after the deaths of William and Agnes 
the same should not wholly revert to the Abbot and his successors and 
his church aforesaid quit of the heirs of William and Agnes for ever. 

(351) At Schryeburn, five weeks after Easter day, between Master 
Robert son of Hugh de Strode, complainant, and Gilbert de Tyderlegh 
and Matilda his wife, impedient, of one messuage, one virgate and 
twenty acres of land in Westhenedstok and Wyberwurth. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Gilbert and Matilda 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Robert, as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to Robert and his heirs of Gilbert and Matilda 
and the heirs of Matilda for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose 
at the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, suit of 
Court, custom and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of 
that fee for Gilbert and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda all other 
seryices which to the said tenements do pertain. And Gilbert and 
Matilda and the heirs of Matilda will warrant the tenements to Robert 
and his heirs by the services aforesaid against all men. For this 
Robert gave to Gilbert and Matilda one sore sparrow hawk. 

(352) At Schyreburn, fifteen days after Easter day, between Richard 
Gustard and Alice his wife, complainants, and Symon, David and Alice, 
his wife, impedients, of one messuage, except one stall (selda) and half 
an acre of land in Lym. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Symon and Alice acknowledged the messuage, except 
the stall and land, to be the right of Richard and Alice, as by the gift 
of Symon and Alice. To have and to hold to Richard and Alice and 
the heirs of Richard of Symon and Alice and the heirs of Alice for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly eighteen pence at four terms, namely four 
pence half penny at Nativity of St. John Baptist, Michaelmas, Nati- 
vity of our Lord, and Easter, for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand. And Symon and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant the 
messuage, except the stall and land, to Richard and Alice and the heirs 
of Richard, by the service aforesaid against all men for ever. For this 
Richard and Alice gave to Symon and Alice sixteen and a half marcs 
of silver. 

(Endorsed,) Ralph de Tyntem puts in his claim. 

(353) A^ Schyreburn, five weeks after Easter day, between Walter 



136 ^ Dorset Fines, 

Haym, complainant, and Master Walter Sckamel, impedient, Ly John 
le Mareschal in his place, of one messuage and one virgate of land in 
Henlegh. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
Walter Sckamel acknowledged the messuage and land to be the right 
of Walter Haym, as by the gift of Walter Sckamel. To have and to 
hold to Walter Haym and his heirs of Walter Sckamel and his heirs 
for ever, rendering therefor yearly two marcs of silver at four terms, 
namely, half a marc at Nativity of St. John Baptist, Michaelmas, 
Nativity of our Lord, and Easter, for all service, suit of Court, custom 
and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Walter 
Sckamel and his heirs all other services which to the messuage and 
land do pertain. And Walter Sckamel and his, heirs will warrant the 
messuage and land to Walter Haym and his heirs by the aforesaid 
services against all men for ever. For this Walter Haym gave to 
Walter Sckamel one sore sparrow hawk. 

(354) At Schyreburn, h\Q weeks after Easter day, between Robert 
de Maundevill, complainant, by Robert de Wodeton in his place, and 
Geoffrey de Maundevill, impedient, by Simon Gernun in his place, of 
one messuage and two carucates of land in Weston. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Geoffrey acknowledged the 
messuage and land, as in demesnes, homages, rents, services of free 
men, vileinages with vileins holding those vileinages, wards, reliefs, 
escheats, woods, meadows, pastures, waters^ ponds, mills, and all other 
things to the tenement and land belonging, without any retainment, to 
be the right of Robert, as by the gift of Geoffrey. To have and to hold 
to Robert and his heirs of Geoffrey and his heirs for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one sore sparrow hawk or two shillings at the feast of St. 
Peter ad Vincula for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. 
And Geoffrey and his heirs will warrant the messuage and land to 
Robert and his heirs by the service aforesaid against all men for ever. 
For this Robert gave to Geoffrey one sore gossehawk (ostorius). 

(355) At Schyreburn, five weeks after Easter day, between William 
son of William de Cattewurth and Alice his wife, plaintiffs, and Reginald 
de Labin, tenent, of one messuage and forty acres of land in Tode- 
berwe. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned berween them. 
William and Alice acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Reginald 
and remitted and quit claimed the same for themselves and the heirs of 
Alice to Reginald and his heirs for ever. For this Reginald gave to 
William and Alice thirty marcs of silver. 

(356) At Schyreburn, five weeks after Easter day, between Robert 
son of Pagan, complainant, and Henry de Ekerdon' and Matilda his 
wife, impedients, of five shillings of rent in Wurthe. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Henry and Matilda acknow- 



52 Henry III. (1267-68). 137 



ledged the rent, which Geoffrey de Ponynton before was accustomed to 
render to them, to be the right of Robert, as by their gift. To have 
and to hold to Robert and his heirs of Henry and Matilda and the heirs 
of Matilda for ever, rendering therefor yearly one clove gillyflower at 
Easter for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And Henry 
and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda will warrant the rent to Robert 
and his heirs by the. service aforesaid against all men for ever. For 
this Robert gave to Henry and Matilda sixty shillings sterling. 

(357) A^ Schyreburn, five weeks after Easter day, between John le 
Parker, plaintiff, and Ralph Dech de Schyreburn, tenent, of three acres 
of land in Schyreborn. Ralph acknowledged the land to be the right 
of John, and rendered the same to him at the Court and remitted and 
quit claimed for himself and his heirs to John and his heirs for ever. 
For this John, at the instance of Ralph, granted to Hugh le Parker the 
said land, to have and to hold to Hugh and his heirs of John and his 
heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all 
service, suit of Court, custom and demand, and doing therefor to the 
chief lords of that fee for John and his heirs all other services which to 
the said land belong. And John and his heirs will warrant the said 
land by the said service, to Hugh and his heirs against all men for ever. 
Moreover Hugh gave John two marcs of silver. 

(358) At Schyreburn, one month after Easter day, between Geoffrey 
son of Gunnilda de Castro de Schyreburn, complainant, and Hugh 
Cleps and Matilda his wife, impedients, of one messuage, twelve acres 
of land, and one acre of meadow in Schyreburn. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned between them. Hugh and Matilda acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Geoffrey, as by their gift. To have and 
to hold to Geoffrey and his heirs of Hugh and Matilda and the heirs of 
Matilda of Matilda for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the 
feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, suit of Court, 
custom and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for 
Hugh and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda all other services which to 
the said tenement belong. And Hugh and Matilda and the heirs of 
Matilda will warrant the said tenement to Geoffrey and his heirs -by the 
said service against all men for ever. For this Geoffrey gave to Hugh 
and Matilda fourteen marcs of silver. 

(359) A^ Schyreburn, one month after Easter day, between Godfrey 
Horn and Matilda his wife, complainants, and Thomas de Mukleford 
and Anastasia his wife, impedients, of a moiety of half a hide of land in 
Wynterborne Atthenasse. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Thomas and Anastasia acknowledged the land to be 
the right of Godfrey and Matilda, as by the gift of Thomas and Anas- 
tasia. To have and to hold to Godfrey and Matilda and the heirs of 



138 Dorset Fines. 

Matilda's body of Thomas and Anastasia and the heirs of Anastasia 
for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the feast of the Nativity 
of St. John Baptist for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. 
And Thomas and Anastasia and the heirs of Anastasia will warrant to 
Godfrey and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda's body the said land by the 
said service against all men for ever. Should Godfrey and Matilda die 
without heir of the body of Matilda, then the land wholly shall revert 
to Thomas and Anastasia and the heirs of Anastasia, to hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the service which to that land belongs, for ever. For 
this Godfrey and Matilda gave to Thomas and Anastasia one sore 
sparrow hawk. 

(360) At Schyreburn, one month after Easter day, between Richard 
Gaugy, plaintiff, and Thomas Gaug}', tenent, by William Sulk* in his 
place, of one messuage and four virgates of land in Wynterbum Gaugy. 
Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. Thomas ac- 
knowledged the messuage and land to be the right of Richard. For 
this Richard granted the messuage and land to Thomas. To have and 
to hold to Thomas for life of Richard and his heirs, rendering therefor 
yearly one pair of white gloves or one penny at Michaelmas for all 
service^ suit of Court, custom and demand. And Richard and his heirs 
will warrant the messuage and land to Thomas by the said service 
against all men during the life of Thomas. After his decease the same 
shall wholly revert to Richard and his heirs quit of the heirs of Thomas, 
to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the service which to the same 
belong for ever. Be it known that it shall not be lawful for Thomas 
to give, sell, pledge or in any other way alien the said tenement, nor to 
make waste, sale or spoil thereof, by doing which the whole of the 
tenement would not revert to Richard and his heirs quit of the heirs of 
Thomas for ever. Moreover Richard gave to Thomas forty shillings 
sterling. 

53 Henry III. (1268^). 

(361) At Gloucester, on the morrow of St. Martin, between Gilbert 
Vnderdon, complainant, and Jordan Vnderdon, deforciant, of one mes- 
suage, one carucate of land, except six acres of land, and twelve shil- 
lings of rent in Bradford. Plea of covenant was summoned between 
them. Jordan acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Gilbert. 
For this Gilbert granted the tenement to Jordan. To have and to hold 
to Jordan for life, of Gilbert and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one 
pair of white gloves or one penny at Easter for all service, suit of Court, 
custom and demand to Gilbert and his heirs belonging, and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Gilbert and his heirs all other 
services which to the said tenement belong. And Gilbert and his heirs 



53 Henry III. (1268-69). 139 



will warrant the said tenement to Jordan by the said services against all 
men for the life of Jordan. After his death the tenement shall wholly 
revert to Gilbert and his heirs quit of the heirs of Jordan for ever. Be 
it known that it shall not he lawful for Jordan to give, sell, pledge, or 
in any other way alien the said tenement, nor make waste, sale or spoil 
thereof, by doing which it would not wholly revert to Gilbert and his 
heirs quit for. 

(362) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Thomas de Clare, complainant, and Emericus de Rupe Canardi and 
Matilda his wife, deforciants, of the hundred Comingesdich, thirty acres 
of wood, seventy shillings and six pence of rent in Sturministr'. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. Emericus and Matilda 
acknowledged the hundred, wood and rent, namely whatever Emericus 
and Matilda formerly had in the said hundred and vill, as in demesnes, 
homages, services of free men, vileinages, knights' fees, advowsons of 
churches, wards, reliefs, escheats, custodies, woods, meadows, pastures, 
waters, ponds, mills, fishponds, fisheries, liberties, and all other things 
to the tenements aforesaid belonging, namely the whole purparty of 
Matilda which came to her from lands and tenements which were of 
the Marshalls (marescallorum) without any retainment.* To have and 
to hold to Thomas and his heirs from the King and his heirs by the 
services which to that tenement belong for ever. For this Thomas 
gave to Emericus and Matilda six score and ten marcs of silver. This 
concord was made between them saving to Emericus and Matilda and 
the heirs of Matilda all escheats which henceforth should fall to them 
in respect of the purparty of the sisters of Matilda of the inheritance 
of the Marshalls. Be it known that if Thomas or his heirs henceforth 
shall be impleaded o^ the lands and tenements aforesaid which Thomas 
had by gift and grant of Emericus and Matilda as is aforesaid, Emeri- 
cus and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda shall be held to warrant to 
them the said tenements against all people for ever. 

(363) At Westminster, on the morrow of Ascension, between 
Nicholas de Andover, complainant, by Thomas Snou in his place, and 
Peter de Chaumpayne and Beatrice his wife, impedients, of one virgate 
of land in Lechet Ministre. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Peter and Beatrice acknowledged the land to be the 
right of Nicholas, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Nicholas 
and his heirs of Peter and Beatrice and the heirs of Beatrice for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one rose at the Nativity of St. John Baptist 
for all service, custom and demand. And Peter and Beatrice and the 
heirs of Beatrice will warrant the land to Nicholas and his heirs by the 

* The sentence apparently is not concluded. 



140 Dorset Fines. 

said services against all men for ever. For this Nicholas gave to Peter 
and Beatrice one sore sparrow hawk. 

(364) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Thomas de Leukenore, complainant, and Joan de Horsenden, 
William Scot and Margery his wife, impedients, of the manor of Bere 
Horsenden. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
Joan, William and Margery acknowledged the manor to be the right 
of Thomas, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Thomas and his 
heirs of Joan, William and Margery and the heirs of Joan and Margery 
for evr, rendering therefor yearly to Joan and her heirs one halfpenny 
at the feast of St. Michael, and to William and Margery and the heirs 
of Margery one halfpenny at the same term for all service, custom and 
demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Joan, 
William and Margery and the heirs of Joan and Margery all other 
services which to that manor belong. And Joan, William and Margery 
and the heirs of Joan and Margery will warrant the manor to Thomas 
and his heirs by the said services against all men for ever. For this 
Thomas gave to Joan, William and Margery one hundred marcs of 
silver. 

(Endorsed,) And Agnes daughter of Henry Lobet put in her claim. 

54 Henry III. (1269-70). 

(365) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hillary, between John 
de Wallop de Dorcestr', complainant, and Peter de Pydele and Matilda 
his wife, impedients, by Alan de Langeford in the place of Peter, of 
one messuage and one stall (selda) in Dorcestr'. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned between them. Peter and Matilda acknowledged 
the messuage and stall to be the right of John, as by their gift. To 
have and to hold to John and his heirs of Peter and Matilda and the 
heirs of Matilda for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the 
Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, custom and demand to 
Peter and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda belonging, and doing there- 
for to the chief lords of that fee for Peter and Matilda and the heirs of 
Matilda all other services which to that messuage and stall do pertain. 
And Peter and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda will warrant to John 
and his heirs the said messuage and stall by the said services against 
all men for ever. For this John gave to Peter and Matilda seven 
marcs of silver. 

(366) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Gwydo 
de Tanton, plaintiff, and Benedict de Bere, tenent, of four messuages 
and two parts of one messuage, one virgate of land and three shillings 
and eight pence and half a pound of cumin of rent in Knygteton and 



55 Henry III. (i 27071). 141 

one fardel of land in Bere. Benedict acknowledged the whole tenement 
to be the right of Gwido, and rendered to him the said two parts of one 
messuage at the Court, and remitted and quitclaimed for himself and 
his heirs to Gwydo and his heirs for ever. For this Gwido granted to 
Benedict the said four messuages and rent. To have and to hold to 
Benedict during life, of Gwido and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly 
two and a half marcs of silver at two terms, namely, one moiety at 
Michaelmas and the other moiety at Easter for all service, custom and 
demand to Gwido and his heirs belonging, and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for Gwido and his heirs all other services which to 
that tenement do pertain. And after the death of Benedict the said tene- 
ment which remains to him by this fine wholly shall revert to Gwydo 
and his heirs, quit of the heirs of Benedict, to hold of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which to that tenement belong for ever. 

(367) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Henry, 
Abbot of Bylindon, complainant, by brother Ralph de Brydinton his 
monk in his place, and Walter le Tanur and Alice his wife, impedients, 
often acres of land in Chaudon Boys. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned between them. Walter and Alice acknowledged the land 
to be the right of the Abbot and his church of Bylynden, as by the gift 
of Walter and Alice. To have and to hold to the Abbot and his succes- 
sors and his church of Walter and Alice and the heirs of Alice in pure 
and perpetual alms, free and quit from all secular service and demand 
for ever. And Walter and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant the 
land to the Abbot and his successors and his church as his free pure 
and perpetual alms, without doing any service therefor, against all men 
for ever. And the Abbot received Walter and Alice and the heirs of 
Alice into all benefits and orisons which henceforth should be done in 
his church for ever. 

{Endorsed.) Henry le Frere de Myddelton put in his claim. 



55 Henry III. (1270-71). 

(368) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between 
William le Neuman and Margery his wife, complainants, by the said 
William and Margery's place, and Lawrence de Bosco and Mabilia 
his wife, impedients, of one messuage in Warham. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Laurence and Mabilia acknow- 
ledged the said messuage to be the right of William and Margery, as 
by the gift of Laurence and Mabilia. To have and to hold to William 
and Margery and their heirs of Laurence and Mabilia and the heirs of 
Mabilia for ever, rendering therefor yearly one halfpenny at Easter for 
all service, custom and demand. And Laurence and Mabilia and the 



142 Dorset Fines. 



heirs of Mabilia will warrant the said messuage to William and 
Margery and their heirs by the said service against all men for 
ever. For this William and Margery ^'ave to Laurence and Mabilia 
eight marcs of silver. 

(369) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hillary, between John 
Redhod, complainant, and Terricus Pake and Anastasia his wife, 
impedients, of one messuage in Dorcestf. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned between them. Terricus and Anastasia acknowledged 
the messuage to be the right of John, as by their gift. To have and to 
hold to John and his heirs of Terricus and Anastasia and the heirs of 
Anastasia for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. 
John Baptist for all service, custom and demand, and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of that fee for Terricus and Anastasia and the heirs of 
Anastasia all other services which to the said messuage belong. And 
Terricus and Anastasia and the heirs of Anastasia will warrant to John 
and his heirs the said messuage by the said services against all men 
for ever. For this John gave to Terricus and Anastasia sixteen marcs 
of silver. 

56 Henry III. (1271-72). 

(370) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
William le Moyne, complainant, and Henry de Novo Burgo, deforciant, 
of one messuage and one carucate of land in Winfrod. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. Henry acknowledged the 
messuage and land as in demesnes, homages, services of free men, 
vileinages, advowsons of the church of the said vill and of the Abbey 
of Bylendon, Knights' fees, hundreds, wards, reliefs; escheats, woods, 
meadoyvs, pastures, waters, ponds, mills, fisheries, turbaries, heaths 
and all other things to the said tenement belonging, to be the right of 
William, as by the gift of Henry. Moreover Henry granted for him- 
self and his heirs that the whole of that tenement which William 
Everard held for term of the life of Joan who was the wife of William 
Belet, and likewise the whole of that tenement which Joan de Cantilupo, 
Agnes de Glovernia and Nicholas son of the said Agnes held for terms 
of their lives of the inheritance of the said Henry in the vill aforesaid 
on the day this concord was made, and which tenements after the 
decease of the said Joan Belet, Joan de Cantilupo, Agnes and Nicholas 
ought to revert to the said Henry and his heirs, should after the deaths 
wholly remain to the said William le Moyne and his heirs, to hold to- 
gether with the aforesaid messuages and land which remain to them by 
this fine, as is aforesaid, of the King and his heirs by the services which 
to that tenement belong for ever. For this William le Moyne gave to 



56 Henry III. (1271-72). 143 

Henry one hundred marcs of silver, and granted to him one messuage 
and two carucates of land in Schypton in the county of Gloucester, 
except homages and services of free men and advowson of the church of 
that vill, which are appurtenances of the said land, and which to 
William le Moyne and his heirs remain by this fine for ever. To have 
and to hold to Henry during his life of William le Moyne and his heirs, 
rendering therefor yearly one penny at Michaelmas for all service, suit 
of Court, custom and demand. And William le Moyne and his heirs 
will warrant to Henry the said messuage and land in Shypton by the 
said service against all men during the life of Henry. After his death 
they wholly will revert to William le Moyne and his heirs quit of the 
heirs of Henry. To hold of the King and his heirs by the services 
which thereto belong for ever. And be it known that it shall not be 
lawful for Henry during his life to give, sell, pledge or in any other 
way alien the said messuage and land in Shypton, or make waste or 
destruction of the vileinages, woods and gardens which to that messuage 
and land do pertain, by doing which the messuage and land in Shypton 
would not wholly revert to William le Moyne and his heirs quit. To 
hold as is aforesaid for ever. And this concord was made by the assent 
and wish of the King he agreeing thereto, and likewise in the presence 
of William Everard, Joan de Cantilupo, Agnes and Nicholas, they 
acknowledging no right for themselves to claim anything in the said 
tenements which they hold unless for the term aforesaid, as is aforesaid. 
{Endorsed.^ Alienora, Queen of England, put m her claim. 
Roger, Abbot of Bylenden, put in his claim. 

(371) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Richard de Shete, clerk, complainant, and John Pygaz and Edith his 
wife, deforciant, of sixty acres of land in Londenesham. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. John and Edith acknowledged 
the land to be the right of Richard, as by their gift. To have and to 
hold to Richard and his heirs of John and Edith and the heirs of Edith 
for ever, rendering therefor yearly one clove gillyflower at Easter for all 
service, custom and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of 
that fee for John and Edith and the heirs of Edith all other services 
which to the said land do pertain. And John and Edith and the heirs 
of Edith will warrant the said land to Richard and his heirs by the said 
services against all men for ever. For this Richard gave to John and 
Edith one sore sparrow hawk. 

(372) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Robert 
Warm de Stormenstr', complainant, and John le Porter and Joan his 
wife, impedients, of twenty acres of land in Stormenstre. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. John and Joan 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Robert, as by their gift. 



144 Dorset Fines, 



Moreover they granted to Robert twenty-three acres of land and ten 
solidates of rent in the said vill, and one messuage in Newenton which 
Roger Hereberd once held. To have and to hold to Robert and his 
heirs of John and Joan and the heirs of Joan for ever, rendering therefor 
yearly one penny at Easter, for all service, custom and demand, and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for John and Joan and the 
heirs of Joan all other services which to that tenement belong. And 
John and Joan and the heirs of Joan will warrant to Robert and his 
heirs the said tenement by the said services against all men for ever. 
For this Robert gave to John and Joan and the heirs of Joan forty 
shillings sterling, and granted for himself and his heirs that henceforth 
they would render yearly to John and Joan during their lives, thirty- 
eight shillings at four terms, namely, nine shillings at Nativity of St 
John Baptist, ten shillings at Michaelmas, nine shillings at Nativity of 
our Lord, and ten shillings at Easter. Should John die, Joan surviving, 
then Robert and his heirs shall render yearly to Joan during her life, 
eighteen shillings at the four said terms, namely at each term four 
shillings and sixpence. If John survived Joan, then Robert and his 
heirs shall render yearly to John during his life twenty shillings at the 
four said terms, namely at each term Rve shillings. And after the 
deaths of both John and Joan, Robert and his heirs shall go quit of the 
payments aforesaid for ever. 

(373) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Thomas Posite, complainant, and Isabella de Frome, imped ient, of 
one messuage and one carucate of land in Frome. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Isabella acknowledged the 
tenement to be the right of Thomas, as by her gift. Vox this Thomas 
granted to Isabella the said tenement. To have and to- hold to Isabella 
during life of Thomas and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly six 
shillings and eight pence at Michaelmas for all service, custom and 
demand. After the death of Isabella the said tenement wholly will 
revert to Thomas and his heirs quit of the heirs of Isabella. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which to that tenement 
belong for ever. 

(374) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, 
between William le Moyne, complainant, and Terricus son of Stephen, 
deforciant, of one messuage and one virgate of land in Wynfrod. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. Terricus acknowledged  
the tenement to be the right of William, as by the gift of Terricus. 
For this William granted the tenement to Terricus and Katherine his 
wife. To have and to hold to Terricus and Katherine of William and 
his heirs during the lives of both Terricus and Katherine, rendering 
therefor yearly one pound of cumin at the Nativity of our Lord for all 



56 Henry III. (1271-72). 145 



service, custom and demand. After their deaths the said tenement 
wholly shall revert to William and his heirs quit of the heirs of 
Terricus and Katherine. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which to that tenement belong for ever. Moreover, William 
gave to Terricus and Katherine twenty marcs of silver. 

(375) A^ Westminster, one month after Easter day, between 
Jocelin de Launceles, complainant, and Roger de Langeford, impedi- 
ent, of one messuage and one carucate of land in Awelton. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Roger acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Jocelin, as by the gift of Roger. To 
have and to hold to Jocelin and his heirs of Roger and his heirs for 
ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, 
custom and demand. And Roger and his heirs will warrant the said 
tenement to Jocelin and his heirs by the said service against all men 
for ever. For this Jocelin gave to Roger twenty marcs of silver. 

(376) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Gilbert 
de Preston, complainant, and William Germeyn and Alice his wife, 
impedients, of two messuages in Dorcestr*. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned between them. William and Alice acknowledged the 
messuages to be the right of Gilbert, as by their gift. To have and 
to hold to Gilbert and his heirs of William and Alice and the heirs 
of Alice for ever, rendering therefor yearly one halfpenny at Easter 
for all service, custom and demand, and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for William and Alice and the heirs of Alice all other 
services which to those messuages belong. And William and Alice 
and the heirs of Alice will warrant the said messuages to Gilbert and 
his heirs by the said services against all men for ever. For this Gilbert 
gave to William and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

(377) At Westminster, five weeks after Easter day, between Mile 
Basset and Avicia his wife, plaintiffs, by William de Hulmo in the 
place of Avicia, and brother Roger de Ver, Prior of the Hospital of St. 
John of Jerusalem in England, tenent, of one messuage, one hyde and 
half a virgate of land and a rent of two pounds of cumin in Pygatewaye. 
And between the said Milo and Avicia, plaintiffs, and the said Prior, who 
Thomas Peus [? Pens] and Felicia his wife vouched to warrant, and who 
warranted to them one messuage, one mill and one virgate of land* in 
the said vill. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between them. 
Milo and Avicia acknowledged the tenement to be the right of the 
Prior and friars of the said hospital and remitted and quit claimed the 
same for themselves and the heirs of Avicia to the Prior and his suc- 
cessors and the friars of the said hospital for ever. For this the Prior 
gave to Milo and Avicia forty marcs of silver. 

(378) At Southampton, fifteen days after the day of the Purification 

10 



146 Dorset Fines. 



of the Blessed Mary, between Henry le Feure and Mabilia his wife, 
complainants, and Robert son of William Miliar' de Aulton, deforci- 
ant, of one messuage, and two carucates of land in Aulton. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. Henry and Mabilia acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of Robert. For this Robert 
granted them to Henry and Mabilia together with all other lands and 
tenements which Alice who was the wife of William Hillar* held in 
dower in the vill of Aulton on the day this concord was made. To 
have and to hold to Henry and Mabilia of Robert and his heirs during 
the lives of both Henry and Mabilia, rendering therefor yearly eight 
marcs of silver at two terms, namely, one moiety at Easter, and the 
other moiety at Michaelmas for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand. And Robert and his heirs will warrant, acquit and defend 
the said tenements to Henry and Mabilia by the said services against 
all men during the lives of Henry and Mabilia. After their deaths 
the tenements wholly will revert to Robert and his heirs quit for ever. 
This concord was made in the presence of Alice who acknowledged 
that she had no right to claim anything in the said lands and tenements 
unless by name of dower. 

DIVERS COUNTIES. 

7 Henry III. (1222-23). 

WILTS AND DORSET. 

(28, old number 25.) At Westminster, in the octaves of the 
Purification of the Blessed Mary, between Alice de la Mare, com- 
plainant, and Alan de Sancto Georgio, deforciant, of the exchange of 
two hides of land in Winterburn, which Alan gave and granted to 
William Quentin of land which was of Alan de Sancto Georgio, the 
father of Alan, in the said vill, and which two hides Alice held 
in dower of the tenement of the said Alan, at one time her husband. 
Alan gave and granted to Alice, for the exchange of the said two hides, 
fifty solidates of land in Hamme in the county of Dorset, namely, six 
acres of land and two acres of meadow which Roger le Champeneis 
held ; six acres of land, and two acres of meadow which Alan son of 
Eva held ; six acres of land, and two acres of meadow which Eva the 
widow held ; six acres of land, and two acres of meadow which Osmund 
de la Gete held ; six acres of land, and two acres of meadow which 
Richard Stille held ; six acres of land and two acres of meadow which 
Simon son of William held ; and six acres of land, and two acres of 
meadow which John son of Serlo held* And from Serlo de Hamme 



Divers Counties, Henry II L 147 



twelve pence by the year. To have and to hold to Alicia during her 
life with vileins holding those vileinages, and all their sequels from 
Alan and his heirs by name of dower. 



9 Henry III. (1225-26). 

DORSET AND SOMERSET. 

(39, old number 36.) At Westminster, on the morrow of the 
Purification of the Blessed Mary, between William son of John, com- 
plainant, and Robert de Gurnay, deforciant, of the manor of Ferenton. 
William acknowledged the manor and likewise all lands and all tene- 
ments which he held on the day this concord was made, as well of his 
own inheritance, as of the inheritance of Matilda at one time his wife, 
to be the right of Robert, as of him who was the son of Thomas, first 
born son of the said William and Matilda, to which Thomas, the sam6 
William before had granted the same and to his heirs by Eva his wife, 
mother of the said Robert, as the said William acknowledged. For this 
Robert granted to William the manor and all the lands and tenements 
aforesaid. To have and to hold during his life of the chief lords by the 
service thereto belonging. Thus William henceforth shall not give, sell 
or pledge nor in any other way alien any part of the said lands or tene- 
ments, unless by the assent and wish of the said Robert or of his heirs, 
except fifteen librates of land, part of the said lands, which William if 
he pleased might give or assign to whoever he wished, provided that 
he or they, to whom he gave it, and their heirs after the death of 
William, shall hold the said land from Robert and his heirs by the 
service which to those fifteen librates shall pertain. This concord was 
made in the presence of Pagan son of the said William, who was 
younger brother of the said Thomas, who agreed thereto and acknow- 
ledged in Court that he had for himself no right of inheritance in the 
said lands and tenements against the aforesaid Robert nor in any of the 
lands and tenements of the inheritance of the aforesaid William and 
Matilda either in England, Ireland or Normandy. For this William, 
at the request and wish of Robert, then in Court gave to Pagan twenty 
librates of land out of the same lands, namely all the land which William 
held in Edmodesham, in Suddon and in Stures in the county of Dorset, 
and all the land which the said William held in Sanford in the county 
of Somerset, with the homage and whole service of Michael de Bagge- 
nore and his heirs in respect of the tenement which he holds in Bagge- 
nore and Colemore; and the homage and whole service of Hugh de 
Cumbe and his heirs in respect of the tenement which he holds in 
Cumbe ; and the homage and whole service of Walter de Loddreford 



148 Dorset Fines, 



and his heirs in respect of the tenement which he holds in Loddreford. 
Saving however to William those lands and services during his life, 
and after his death, Pagan and his heirs shall hold those lands and 
services from the said Robert and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the 
service of three knights for all service. And all other lands and all 
other tenements, except the aforesaid fifteen librates of land, after 
William's death shall revert to the said Robert and his heirs quit 
for ever. 

DORSET AND SOMERSET. 

(42, old number 37.) At Westminster, on the morrow of the 
Apostles Simon and Jude, between Roger son of Pagan, plaintiff, and 
Robert de Novo burgo, tenent, of the manor of Portstok in the county 
of Dorset. And between the same Roger, plaintiff, and Margery Belet, 
tenent of the manor of Bromfeld and of a moiety of the manor of 
Cherlton in the county of Somerset. Margery vouched to warrant the 
said Robert against Roger, who came and warranted to her. Assize 
of mort ancestor was summoned between Roger, Robert and Margery. 
And between the same Robert, plaintiff, and Alice Briwerr', tenent, of a 
a moiety of the vill of Worth in the county of Dorset. Alice vouched 
to warrant the said Roger against Robert as for her dower, who came 
and warranted to her. Roger remitted and quit claimed for himself and 
his heirs to Robert and Margery and their heirs all his right and claim 
in the aforesaid manor of Portstok and in the said manor of Bromfeld 
and in the said moiety of the manor of Cherlton, except the advowson 
of the church of that vill, and to which Roger or his heirs shall present 
the first clerk after the decease of John de la Ford who was parson on 
the day this concord was made, and when that clerk is dead who shall 
be presented by Roger or his heirs, Margery or her heirs shall present 
a clerk. And so from clerk to clerk alternately for ever. For this 
Robert remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Roger 
and Alice and the heirs of Roger his right and claim in the aforesaid 
moiety of the vill of Worth, and likewise remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs to Roger and his heirs all his right and claim in 
the moiety of the vill of Ceden in the county of Somerset whereupon 
there was a dispute between them. Moreover Robert granted, rendered 
and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Roger and his heirs the 
homage and whole service of Ralph de Muntsorell and his heirs in 
respect of two knights' fees in Wichtlakington in county of Somerset ; 
and the homage and whole service of William son of Henry and his 
heirs in respect of a knight's fee in Kemthecumb in the county of Dorset. 
This concord was made there being present Ralph and William who 
acknowledged that they owed the said services. 



Divers Counties y Henry III. 149 

II Henry III. (1226-27). 

SOMERSET, WILTS, DORSET AND SURREY. 

(48, old number  .) At Ivelcestr', on the morrow of Ash Wednes- 
day, between Robert de Gurnay, plaintiff, and Roger de Vilers, 
tenent, of three hides of land in Saunford in county of Somerset. And 
between the same Robert, plaintiff, and Roger de Vilers, tenent, of three 
hides of land in Stures in .county of Dorset. Robert acknowledged the 
land to be the right of Roger, together with the whole of the land of 
Petlesworth which Roger held in demesne and service on the day this 
concord was made To have and to hold to Roger, and his heirs of 
Robert and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the service of half a knight 
for all service. For this Roger gave, granted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs to Robert and his heirs the homage and whole 
service of Wymund de Raleg' and his heirs in respect of half a knight's 
fee in Cumba in county of Surrey, and the homage and whole service 
of Robert son of Pagan and his heirs in respect of the tenement which 
Robert held from him in Stepelkary in county of Somerset; and the 
homage and whole service of Walter son of William in respect of a 
fourth part of a knight's fee in Cernecote in county of Wilts. To have 
and to hold to Robert and his heirs of the chief lords of those fees by 
the services which to those lands do pertain. Moreover Roger gave to 
Robert thirty marcs of silver. 

DORSET AND DEVON. 

(49, old number 9.) At Ivelcestr', on the morrow of Ash 
Wednesday, between Roger, Abbot of Ford, plaintiff, by brother 
William de Blaneford in his place, and Simon de Pillesdun, impedient, 
of the advowson of the church of Burghestoka. Simon remitted and 
quit claimed for himself and his heirs to the Abbot and his successors 
his right and claim in the advowson ; and further, in the manors of 
Burghestok' in the county of Dorset, and in Cattesclive which is a 
member of Burghestok; and in the vill of Lintun in the county of 
Devon. For this remission and quit claim of the manors the Abbot 
granted that he and his successors would yearly render to Simon and 
his heirs twenty shillings at Ford, out of the manors, at four terms, - 
namely five shillings at Easter, the Nativity of St. John Baptist, 
Michaelmas, and the Nativity of our Lord for all service to Simon or 
his heirs pertaining. Thus whereas the said Abbqt before rendered ten 
shillings from those tenements, henceforth he and his successors shall 
render to Simon and his heirs twenty shillings as is aforesaid. 



150 Dorset Fines, 



14 Henry III. (1229-30). 

DEVON, DORSET, WILTS, SOUTHAMPTON, SURREY AND 

ESSEX. 

(72, old number 25.) At Westminster, fifteen days after 
Easter day, between John son of Geoffrey, plaintiff, and Roger 
de Dantesy and Matilda his wife, who the Prior of Bishops- 
gate-Without, vouched to warrant and who warranted to him 
one carucate of land in Ditton in the county of Surrey. And 
between the said Roger and Matilda, plaintiffs, and the said John, 
tenent, of the whole manor of Gersich in the county of Dorset, and the 
whole manor of Chiriel and whole manor of Wynterslawe in the county 
of Wilts, and of a rent of thirty five shillings in Morton in the county 
of Devon. Recognizance of assize of mort ancestor was summoned 
between them. John acknowledged the land in Ditton to be the right 
of Matilda and remitted and quit claimed the same for himself and his 
heirs to Roger and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda, likewise to the 
said Prior and his successors for ever. Moreover John gave and 
granted to Roger and Matilda the whole manor of Depeden with the 
advowson of the church and with all the knights' fees to that manor 
belonging. And the whole manor of Gersich and the houses and 
buildings which John held in the vill of Winton. To have and to hold 
to Roger and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda from the chief lords of 
the fee and their heirs, doing therefor the services which to the manors 
of Depeden and Gersich and the said houses belong. Moreover John 
granted to Roger and Matilda a rent of one hundred shillings yearly in 
Chiriel, to be received by Roger and Matilda and the heirs of Matilda 
from the hand of John and his heirs at four terms, namely, twenty-five 
shillings at Nativity of our Lord, Easter, Nativity of St. John Baptist 
and Michaelmas. Should it happen that John or his heirs did not pay 
the said rent as is aforesaid, it shall be lawful for Roger and Matilda 
and the heirs of Matilda to distrain John and his heirs by their chattels 
found in the said manor of Chiriel until full payment. For this Roger 
and Matilda acknowledged all the rest of the lands and tenements which 
John held by inheritance or purchase from Geoffrey son of Peter, father 
of the said John and Matilda wheresoever they be, to be the right of 
John, and remitted and quit claimed them for himself and the heirs of 
Matilda to John and his heirs for ever. Thus if John should have no 
heir of his body, then all the rest of the manor of Chiriel after his death 
shall revert to Matilda and her heirs quit for ever. Yox this Roger and 
Matilda granted for themselves and the heirs of Matilda that John and 
his heirs may have all the lands and tenements which they could 
purchase against all who hold anything therein of the inheritance or 



Divers Counties, Henry II L 151 

purchase of the said Geoffrey son of Peter. And that the said John 
may claim such lands and tenements as the heir of Geoffrey. So that 
those lands and tenements which were purchased may remain to John 
and the heirs of his body. If he had no heirs of his body the lands so 
purchased on the day this concord was made shall revert after his death 
to Matilda and her heirs quit of the other heirs of John for ever. Be 
it known that the rent of one hundred shillings ought yearly to be 
rendered in the manor of Chiriel at the said terms as is aforesaid. 



DORSET, WILTS, NORTHAMPTON, HUNTINGDON, CAM- 
BRIDGE AND NORFOLK. 

(77, old number 26.) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. 
Michael, between Roger de Quenci, complainant, and John de Lasey, 
Constable of Chester and Margaret his wife, deforciants, of the inheri- 
tance of Saer de Quency, at one time Earl of Winchester in Ketelestan, 
Chennoure, Sudho, Aymsbir', Bukby, Grantesete, Herdwik, Braden- 
ham, and of the inheritance of Margaret de Quency, Countess of 
Winchester, namely, a moiety of the honor of Leycestr*. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. John and Margaret acknow- 
ledged the lands, moiety of the honor of Leycestr' and the whole 
inheritance of the said Saier in England, Scotland, Flanders and 
Normandy and the whole inheritance of Margaret, Countess of 
Winchester in England and Normandy to be the right of Roger. For 
this Roger gave and granted to John and Margaret the manor of 
Kingeston in county of Dorset, and likewise the whole land which 
Loretta, formerly Countess of Leycestr' at one time held by name of 
dower in Wimburn and Blaneford, with the whole forest and chases of 
Wimbumeholt and with all the woods and warrens of Kingeston and 
with all the other liberties and easements and all other things to the 
said manor of Kingeston and to the said lands of Wimburn and Blane- 
ford belonging. Except the tenement which Nicholas de Wilclegh 
held. And moreover Roger acknowledged and granted to John and 
Margaret the manors of Bradeham, Grantesete, Bukby, and Herdewik 
as Hawisa who was the wife of Robert de Quency held in dower, and 
the homage and whole service of Matthew Turpin and his heirs in 
respect of one knight's fee in Winterslawe in county of Wilts. To 
have and to hold to John and Margaret and the heirs of the body of 
Margaret from Roger and his heirs, doing therefor the service of five 
knights for all service and demand. Saving to Hawisa the said four 
manors of Bradeham, Grantesete, Bukby and Herdewik. To hold 
during life by name of dower. And moreover Roger and his heirs 
will warrant to John and Margaret and the heirs of the body of ' 



152 Dorset Fines. 



Margaret all the said lands of Kingeston, Wimburn, Blanford, Bradham, 
Grantesete, Bukby and Herdewik with the forest of Wimburneholt and 
the woods and warrens and chases against all men for ever. And be 
it known that Margaret de Quency, Countess of Winchester was 
present in the Court and granted this concord. Be it known also that 
Hawisa was present in the said Court and acknowledged and granted 
that she claimed nothing in the said manors of Bradeham, Grantesete, 
Bukby and Herdewik unless by name of dower. And be it known that 
if Margaret should die without heir of her body begotten all the said 
lands shall revert to Roger and his heirs without any retainment, saving 
to the said John, the Constable of Chester, all the said lands to hold 
during life. 

(Endorsed.) "John de Homgre [name not very clear] and John de 
Shelford put in their claim in the messuage of Herdwic in county 
Dorset," ** the Bench (Bancus) the fourteenth year of Henry." 

19 Henry III. (1234-35). 

DERBY AND DORSET. 

(114, old number 65.) At Cambridge, in the octaves of Holy 
Trinity, between Robert de Lexint', complainant, and Thomas le 
Bretun and Alice his wife, impedients, of the whole capital messuage 
of Scardeclive and the third part of a moiety of the manor of Scarde- 
clive and the third part of the park of the same vill. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Thomas and Alice acknow- 
ledged the capital messuage and third part of a moiety of the manor, 
in demesnes and services of free men and vileins and in all other things to 
the said third part belonging, and the third part of the park and whatever 
fell to them, in respect of the homage and service of the heirs of Robert 
son of William de Alferton for the whole tenement which they held 
from Brian de Insula in Blacwell ; and of the homage and service of 
John Dayncurt and his heirs for the whole tenement which he held from 
Brian in Assoure, to be the right of Robert, as by the gift of Thomas 
and Alice. To have and to hold to Robert and his heirs of Thomas 
and Alice and the heirs of Alice, or of the chief lords of that fee, as 
Robert or his heirs may wish, doing therefor such foreign service as 
belongs to the said land for all service and demand. For this Robert 
gave to Thomas and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. Be it known that 
Roger la Zuche guardian of the heir of Brian de Stopham appointed 
[elegit  ? elected], to the behoof of the heir who ought to have esnecy 
(aynescia) of the inheritance of Brian de Insula, a capital messuage in 
Blaneford in the county of Dorset, and Thomas and Alice appointed, 
against that messuage, the aforesaid capital messuage of Scardeclive. 



Divers Counties, Henry III. 153 

20 Henry III. (1235-36). 

WILTS AND DORSET. 

(123, old number i.) At Wilton, on the Saturday next after the 
conversion of St. Paul, between William Quentin and Joan his wife, 
plaintiffs, and Erneburga de Gillingham and Elena her sister, tenents, 
of eight acres of land in Mere in the county of Wilts, and of a fourth 
part of one virgate of land in Gillingham in the county of Dorset. 
William and Joan remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the 
heirs of Joan to Erneburga and Elena and their heirs, all their right 
and claim in the whole of the land, for ever. For this Erneburga and 
Elena gave to William and Joan ten and a half marcs of silver. 

26 Henry III. (1241 42). 

DORSET AND HUNTINGDON. 

(175, old number 54.) At Portesmouth, fifteen days after Easter 
day, between Matilda, Abbess of Tarente, complainant, by brother 
William de Tarente in her place, and Robert de Pavely and Petronilla 
his wife, impedients, by Eustace de Gerardvill and Elias son of Peter, 
in their place, of one carucate of land in Tarente Kaynes. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Robert and Petronilla 
acknowledged the land to be the right of the Abbess and her church of 
Tarente, as by their gift. To have and to hold to the Abbess and other 
Abbesses who succeed her, and her church aforesaid, in free and per- 
petual alms, doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Robert and 
Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla all services which to the said land 
belong. And Robert and Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla will 
warrant the said land to the Abbess and her successors and the church 
as her free and perpetual alms by the said services against all men for 
ever. For this the Abbess gave and granted to Robert and Petronilla 
in exchange for the said carucate, eight virgates of land, one toft and 
fifteen acres of meadow in Stanton Griselby in the county of Hunting- 
don, with vileins holding those vileinages and all their sequels, and 
likewise the homage and whole service of Thomas Dalket and his heirs 
in respect of one virgate which Thomas before held of the Abbess in 
the said vill, namely one marc yearly. To have and to hold to Robert 
and Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla of the Abbess and her suc- 
cessors and her church, quit, for ever. And the Abbess and her suc- 
cessors will warrant to Robert and Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla 
all the aforesaid tenements with vileins holding those vileinages and 
their sequels and with all other things to the said tenements belonging 
against all men for ever. Moreover the Abbess at the petition of 



154 Dorset Fines, 



Robert and Petronilla gave and granted to Matilda, daughter of Robert 
and Petronilla all the residue of the whole tenement which she, the 
Abbess, before held in the said vill of Stanton Grisby and likewise in 
Hilton. To have and to hold to Matilda and her heirs of the Abbess 
and her successors and her church for ever, rendering therefor yearly 
one pound of pepper at Michaelmas for all service and demand. And 
the Abbess and her successors will warrant to Matilda and her heirs 
the whole of the said residue by the said service against all men for ever. 
This concord was made in the presence of Thomas Dalket, acknow- 
ledging himself to owe the said rent. 

27 Henry III. (1242-43). 

DORSET AND HUNTINGDON. 

(182, old number 57.) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. Mar- 
tin, between . . . [Matilda],* Abbess of Tharente, complainant, by brother 
William de Tharente in her place, and Robert de Pavely and Petronilla 
his wife, deforciants, of one carucate of land in Tharente Kaenes. 
Robert and Petronilla acknowledged the said carucate, as wholly as 
they before held the same, to be the right of the Abbess and her church 
of Tharente, as by their gift, and that culture . . . cumbe, and that 
culture which stretches towards Gretedich and is called Buttes and all 
the demesne which Robert and Petronilla held before this fine was made 
between the road which leads from Crauford to Gretedich and the water 
of Tharente, and all the meadow called La ... , and the homage and 
whole service of Roger de Lokevill and his heirs for a tenement he 
held before from them in Crauford, and seven acres of meadow which 
William de Kaenes at one time held from Ralph de Sepwik and which 
abut upon Serleford and three acres of meadow which are of the fee of 
William de Carentham and one piece of wood in the wood of Chetreth 
which lies within the metes and bounds following, that is to say, it 
stretches from the road called Bradeweye as far as La Dene, thence as 
far as the road called Halsede Weye, and so along that road as far as 
the path which leads towards the " voleta " (the word is ** voletam," 
accusative), which is in Esweye and so by Esseweye as far as the said 
road called Bradeweye, and the whole pasture which Robert and Petro- 
nilla before had on the eastern side of the road which leads from Crau- 
ford by Gretedich and by Gretebergh towards Hemedeswurth, and 
pasture for a whole year for sixteen oxen and four cows which Robert 
and Petronilla before had in the pasture of William de Kaenes in the 
vill of Tharente Kaenes everywhere with the oxen and cows of the said 

* A great part of the document torn off. 



Divers Counties, Henry III. 155 

William, that is to say, all the land they had before in the said vill as 
in demesnes, rents, woods, meadows, feedings and pastures and all 
liberties and free customs and all other things to the said land belong- 
ing. To have and to hold to the Abbess and other Abbesses who shall 
succeed her and her church in free and perpetual alms for ever, doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Robert and Petronilla and the 
heirs of Petronilla all services which to the said land belong. And 
Robert and Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla will warrant to the 
Abbess and her successors and her church, the said carucate of land 
according as is aforesaid as her free and perpetual alms by the said 
services against all men for ever. For this the Abbess gave and granted 
to Robert and Petronilla in exchange for the said carucate, eight virgates 
of land, one toft and fifteen acres of meadow in Stanton Gryseby in the 
county of Huntingdon, as entirely as the Abbess before held the same, 
and fifteen acres of meadow in a meadow called Hay and one . . . 
and the whole service of the said Thomas and his heirs in respect 
of one virgate of land which Thomas before held from the Abbess 
in the said vill, that is to say one marc yearly. To have and to hold 
to Robert and Petronilla and the heirs . . . and her successors 
quit for ever. And the Abbess and her successors will warrant the 
said tenements to Robert and Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla, 
which to them remain with the vileins holding those vileinages and 
all their sequels and with all other things to the said tenements 
pertaining against all men quit for ever. And moreover the Abbess 
at the request of Robert and Petronilla gave and granted to . . . the 
residue of the whole of the tenement which the Abbess before 
held in the vill of Stanton Griseby and likewise in Hilton without any 
retainment. To have and to hold to Matilda and her heirs of the 
Abbess and her successors . . . therefor yearly one pound of pepper at 
Michaelmas for all service and demand. And the Abbess and her 
successors will warrant, acquit and 'defend to Matilda and her heirs 
the said residue . . . against all men for ever. This concord was made 
in the presence of Thomas Dalket, who acknowledged that he owed 
the said rent. 

28 Henry III. (1243-44). 
WILTS AND DORSET. 
(194, old number 67.) At Lancavaton, one month after Easter 
day, between Christiana who was the wife of Robert le Gentil, plaintiff, 
by Robert her son in her place, and John le Gentil, tenent of two 
carucates of land, except sixteen acres of land in Linlegh, and between 
the same Christiana, plaintiff, and the said John who Godehilda de 
Berewyk vouched to warrant and who warranted to her twelve acres of 



156 Dorset Fines. 



land in the said vill, and between the same Christiana, plaintiff, and 
the said John, who Robert le Vel vouched to warrant and who war- 
ranted to him four acres of land in the said vill, which she claims as 
her reasonable dower, whereof the aforesaid Robert once her husband 
by name endowered her at the porch of the church when he married 
her. Christiana remitted and quit claimed for herself to the said John 
and his heirs all her right and claim in the said land by name of 
dower for ever. For this John granted to Christiana the land which he 
holds in Gussich in the county of Dorset as in demesnes, rents, homages 
and services of free men and vileins and all other things to the said land 
belonging. To have and to hold to Christiana during her life by name 
of dower of John and his heirs, doing therefor all services which to the 
said land belong. And John and his heirs will warrant to Christiana 
the said land during her life as is aforesaid against all men. After the 
death of Christiana the land shall revert to John and his heirs quit for 
ever. 

BERKS, BUCKS, SOUTHAMPTON, DORSET AND WILTS. 

(198, old number 69.) At Westminster, fifteen days after 
the day of Holy Trinity, between Roger de Syfrewast, complainant, 
by John Makerel in his place, and Richard de Syfrewast, deforciant, 
of the manor of Clivewar in county of Berks, manor of Cestresham 
in county of Bucks, manor of Polhampton in county of Southampton, 
manor of Creche in county of Dorset. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned between them. Roger acknowledged the said manors to be 
the right of Richard. For this Richard granted to Roger the 
manors of Chestresham, Polhampton and Creche. To have and 
to hold to Roger and his heirs of Richard and his heirs for ever, 
doing therefor all services which to those manors belong. Moreover 
Richard and Roger granted for themselves and their heirs that the 
whole inheritance which should come to them or either of them from 
any of their ancestors should be divided between Richard and Roger 
and their heirs. Provided nevertheless that Roger and his heirs shall 
hold the moiety which comes to them of Richard and his heirs by the 
services which to that moiety belong for ever, and the whole of the 
cost of acquiring the inheritance shall be divided between them and 
their heirs for ever. Should it happen that any feoffee be impleaded 
by th ancestors of Richard and Roger in respect of his tenement and 
should vouch them to warrant, both shall be held to warrant to him 
according to the quantity of their tenements. This concord was made 
saving the right of both Richard and Roger in respect of the manor of 
Ceptre in the county of Wilts. 



Divers Counties^ Henry III. 157 

29 Henry III. (1244-45). 

SOMERSET AND DORSET. 

(203, old number 80.) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter 
day, between Andrew Wake, complainant, and Robert Humaz 
and Felicia his wife, impedients, by the said Robert in Felicia's place, 
of the manor of Batecumbe (co. Somerset). Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned between them. Robert and Felicia acknowledged the 
manor to be the right of Andrew, as by their gift. For this Andrew 
granted to them the manor of Dovelz (co. Dorset). To have and to 
hold to Robert and Felicia during their lives of Andrew and his heirs, 
rendering therefor yearly one pair of white gloves or one penny at the 
Nativity of our Lord, and doing therefor the foreign service which 
belongs to the said manor for all service and demand. After the death 
of Robert and Felicia the manor wholly shall revert to Andrew and 
his heirs quit for ever. 

31 Henry III. (1246-47). 

KENT AND DORSET. 

(215, old number 8.) At Warwik', fifteen days after Easter 
day, between John son of Henry de Cobbeham, complainant, and 
Geoffrey Mauregard, impedient, of ten pounds (?) (librates) of rent in 
Cobbeham and Shomes, namely, those which John was accustomed 
to render before to Geoffrey, for lands which he at one time held of 
Geoffrey and Alda his wife in the said vills. Plea of covenant was 
summoned between them. Geoffrey remitted and quit claimed for 
himself and his heirs to John and his heirs the said ten librates of 
rent for ever, and gfanted for himself and his heirs that they would 
henceforth have and hold all the said lands of Geoffrey and his heirs 
for ever, doing therefor the service of a fourth part of one knight's fee, 
and rendering therefor yearly one sore sparrow hawk or two shillings 
at Michaelmas, at Cobbeham, for all service, suit of Court, custody^ 
relief, help, custom and demand where John and his ancestors before 
were accustomed to render ten librates yearly for the said lands. And 
Geoffrey and his heirs will warrant the said lands to John and his 
heirs by the said services against all men for ever, and likewise will 
warrant the said ten librates of rent by the said services to John and 
his heirs if they shall be impleaded concerning any of the said rent or 
any one demands the same of them against all men for ever. And 
moreover Geoffrey granted for himself and his heirs that henceforth 
they would not be able to give, sell, pledge, or in any other way alien 



158 Dorset Fines, 



any of the lands which they held in Shypton and Kingeston in the 
county of Dorset on the day this concord was made, by doing which 
they would not have sufficient tenements in those vills to be able to 
warrant to John and his heirs the said ten librates of rent and all 
the lands and tenements in the said vills of Cobbeham and Shornes 
as is aforesaid against all men for ever. For this John gave to Geoffrey 
one hundred pounds sterling. 

33 Henry III. (1248-49). 

NORTHAMPTON, SOMERSET, DORSET AND WILTS. 

(236, old number 29.) At Wilton, on the morrow of Holy 
Trinity, between Philip Lucyen and Joan his wife, complainants, and 
Bcrenger de Welles and Cristiana his wife, Richard de Wyggeber and 
Ela his wife, deforciants, of the manor of Brochol. Plea of covenant 
was summoned between them. Beringer and Cristiana, Richard and 
Ela remitted and quit claimed for themselves and the heirs of 
Cristiana and Ela to Philip and Joan and the heirs of Joan all their 
right and claim in the said manor and the advowson of the church for 
ever. And likewise their right and claim in half a knight's fee which 
Richard de Mucegros held of Philip and. Joan in Bruham in county 
of Somerset on the day this concord was made, for ever. And more- 
over Berenger and Cristiana, Richard and Ela acknowledged that tene- 
- ment which Philip and Joan had in Weston in county of Dorset by the 
gift of ^atthew Wak on the day this concord was made, to be the right 
of Joan. To have and to hold to Philip and Joan and the heirs of Joan 
of Richard and Ela and the heirs of Ela for ever, doing therefor the 
fourth part of a knight's fee for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand. Richard and Ela and the heirs of Ela will warrant to Philip 
and Joan and the heirs of Joan the said tenement in Weston as is 
aforesaid by the said service against all men for ever. For this Philip 
and Joan acknowledged all the lands and tenements which Berenger 
and Cristiana, Richard and Ela held in fee in Ebbeleburn Wak' on the 
day this concord was made to be the right of Cristiana and Ela. To 
have and to hold to Berenger and Cristiana, Richard and Ela and the 
heirs of Cristiana and Ela of the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing 
therefor all services which to those lands and tenements belong. 
Moreover Philip and Joan remitted and quit claimed for themselves 
and the heirs of Joan to Berenger and Cristiana and the heirs of 
Cristiana all the right and claim in all the lands and tenements which 
Thomas de Perham held in Cherleton in county of Somerset on the 
day this concord was made for ever. Provided nevertheless that Philip 



Divers Cauntiesy Henry III. 159 

and Joan or the heirs of Joan henceforth can neither claim nor demand 
anything in the said lands and tenements either in demesne or in 
service. 

34 Henry III. (1249-50). 

DORSET AND WILTS. 

(251, old number 37.) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy 
Trinity, between Robert de London, plaintiff, and Henry de Pidele, 
tenent, of one carucate of land in Pidele Aloume. A duel was waged 
between them in the Court. And between the same Henry, plaintiff, 
and the same Robert, tenent, of one messuage and four carucates of 
land in Axeford, except the aforesaid carucate in Pidele Aleume. Henry 
acknowledged the said carucate to be the right of Robert. Moreover 
Henry remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Robert and 
his heirs all his right and claim in the said messuage and four caru- 
cates, except the said carucate in Pidele Aloume for ever. For this 
Robert granted to Henry the said carucate. To have and to hold to 
Henry and his heirs of Robert and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the 
service of one knight as in wards, reliefs and scutage for all service, 
suit of Court, custom and demand. And Robert and his heirs will 
warrant to Henry and his heirs the said carucate of land in Pudele 
Aleume by the aforesaid service against all men for ever. Moreover 
Robert gave to Henry eight score marcs of silver. 

36 Henry IIL (1251-52). 

BUCKS, BERKS, SOUTHAMPTON, SOMERSET, DORSET 

AND WILTS. 

(266, old number 47.) At Westminster, one month after Easter 
day, between Roger de Syfrewast, complainant, and Richard de Syfre- 
wast, deforciant, of the manors of Cliveware, Cestresham and Polhamp- 
ton, and of one and a half knight's fee in Hereyerd, two knights' fees in 
Cettre (probably Chedder), one carucate of land in Elsefeld, and one 
knights fee in Avene. Roger acknowledged all the said manors and 
tenements, together with that tenement which he had by the gift of 
Henry de Bathonia in Cettre on the day this concord was made, to be 
the right of Richard. For this Richard granted to Roger the manors 
of Cestresham and Polhampton, together with the manor of Chruchil 
in the county of Dorset and a moiety of the whole tenement which he 
held in Cettre on the day this concord was made and the .capital mes- 
suage of the same vil, and all other things to that moiety belonging, 
exceptthe advowson of the church which remains to Richard and his 



i6o Dorset Fines. 



heirs by this fine quit for ever. Likewise Richard granted to Roger 
the tenement Roger had by gift of Henry de Bathonia in Cettre without 
any retainment. To have and to hold to Roger and his heirs of 
Richard and his heirs for ever, doing therefor all services which be- 
long to the said tenements which to Roger and his heirs remain by this 
fine. And the surplusage of all the said tenements and the advow- 
sonjwill wholly remain to Richard, to hold to himself and his heirs of 
the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing therefor the services which to 
the said tenements belong. Moreover Roger and Richard granted for 
themselves and their heirs that the whole inheritance which should 
come to 'him ^ or [either of them in any way by right of heredity from 
any of their ancestors should be divided between them. Provided 
nevertheless that Roger and his heirs shall hold their moiety of Richard 
and his heirs by the services which to that moiety belong for ever, and the 
whole of the cost of acquiring the inheritance shall be divided between 
them and their heirs for ever. Should it happen that, by the common 
consent of either Roger, Richard or their heirs, a plea be moved re- 
specting the purchase of any of the inheritance, the party should hold 
the land or tenement so acquired entirely untill the other party has paid 
to him in full his share of the costs. And after the payment of the 
costs then shall they divide amongst them the inheritance which by 
that plea was so acquired. Should it happen that any feoffee be im- 
pleaded by the ancestors of Roger and Richard in respect of his tene- 
ment and should vouch them to warrant, both shall be held to war- 
rant to him. This concord was made in the presence of Henry de 
Bathonia who agreed thereto. Be it known that the fine before made 
and all the other covenants between Roger and Richard concerning the 
tenements aforesaid, are by this fine annulled. 

WARWICK, WILTS AND DORSET. 

(273, old number 49.) At Westminster, three weeks after the 
day of Holy Trinity, between Geoffrey de Cauz and Margery his wife 
and Margery de Styvichehal, complainants, by John de Stratford in 
their place, and Thomas de Clynton, impedient, by Roger de Byshege 
in his place, of the advowson of the church of Northlydiert. Thomas 
at the instance of Geoffrey and Margery acknowledged the advowson to 
be the right of Margery de Stivichehal and remitted and quit claimed 
the same for themselves and their heirs to her and her heirs for ever. 
For this Geoffrey and Margery and Margery de Styvichehal acknow- 
ledged the advowson of the church of Aldulvestre in the county of War- 
wick to be the right of Thomas and remitted and quit claimed the same 
for themselves and the heirs of Margery and Margery to Thomas and his 



Divers Counties, Henry III, i6i 

heirs for ever. And Geoffrey and Margery granted for themselves and 
the heirs of Margery that as soon as the church of Melcumbe is vacant, 
Thomas or his heirs shall present a clerk thereto. And so Thomas 
and his heirs and Geoffrey and Margery and the heirs of Margery shall 
alternately and successively present clerks to the same church for 
ever. 

37 Henry III. (1252-53). 

GLOUCESTER, SOUTHAMPTON, DORSET, WILTS AND 

BERKS. 

(284, old number 68.) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. 
Hillar&gt;% between William de Valenc', complainant, and William de 
Ponte Archo, deforciant, of the manors of Swyndon, Neuton, Sopwrth, 
Morton, Wlurichesthorp, Scaleye, Lauwarin, Cumpton, Hauekesl* and 
Waddon. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. William 
de Ponte Archo acknowledged all the said manors with their members 
to be the right of William de Valenc' and remitted and quit claimed 
them for himself and his heirs to William de Valenc' and his heirs for 
ever, except the manors of Walwrichestorp and Lauwarin. For this 
William de Valenc' granted to William de Ponte Archo those two 
manors. To have and to hold to William de Ponte Archo and his heirs 
of William de Valenc' and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the service 
of a tenth part of a knight's fee. 

(Endorsed,) And Robert de Sancto Johanne put in his claim for 
the lands and fees in the counties of Dorset and Southampton. 

And Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex put in his 
claim for the lands and fees in Morton and Whaddon. 



38 Henry IIL (1253-54). 

SURREY AND DORSET. 

(297, old number 90.) At St. Bridgett's, London, in the octaves 
of St. Martin, between Emma Belet, plaintiff, and John de Vale Torta 
and Alice his wife, tenents, of one carucate of land in West Shenes in 
the county of Surrey, one carucate of land in Knihtteton and Forste- 
shull, half a carucate of land in Blaneford St. Mary, and one virgate 
of land in Wynefrod in the county of Dorset. Emma acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right and reasonable part of Alice which came 
to her by inheritance from John Belet father of Emma and Alice, whose 
heirs they are. To have and to hold to John and Alice and the heirs 
of the body of Alice of the chief lords of that fee for ever, doing there- 
for all services which to the said tenements belong. Should Alice die 

II 



1 62 Dorset Fines. 



without heirs of her body, then after the death of both John and Alice 
the tenements revert to Emma and her heirs, to hold together with all 
the lands and tenements which the same Emma held in the said vills 
on the day this concord was made by inheritance from John Belet of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which to those tenements 
belong for ever. For this John and Alice gave to Emma thirty marcs 
of silver. 



40 Henry III. (1255-56). 

SOUTHAMPTON, NORTHUMBERLAND AND DORSET. 

(320, old number 3.) At Westminster, fifteen days after the 
day of St. John, between Symon de Monte Forti, Earl of Leycester, 
complainant, and Hereward de Marisco and Rametta his wife, im- 
pedients, of the manors of Emeledon Dunstan Staunford and Burton 
and one burgage in Baunburg'. Plea of warranty of deed was sum- 
moned between them. Hereward and Rametta acknowledged all the 
said' manors and the burgage, that is to say, the whole barony of 
Emeledon without any retainment, as in demesnes, homages, rents, 
wards, reliefs, escheats, vileinages, knights' fees, liberties, adowsons of 
churches, woods, meadows, pastures and all other things thereto be- 
longing to be the right of the Earl, as by their gift, and remitted and 
quit claimed the same for themselves and the heirs of Rametta to the 
Earl and his heirs for ever, and also all their right and claim in the 
manors of Newenton super moram, Shypleye and Kartlyndon and 
likewise in all other lands and tenements which to Rametta and her 
heirs could come by right of inheritance in the county of Northumber- 
land for ever. To have and to hold to the Earl and his heirs of the 
chief lords of those fees for ever, doing therefor to the King and his 
heirs for the said barony of Emeledon all services which thereto belong, 
and doing therefor to the other lords for the other lands the services 
which thereto belong. For this the Earl granted to Hereward and 
Rametta the manor of Chanton in county of Southampton and manor 
of Shepwye in county of Dorset, except the homage and services of 
Roger de Chaunpayne, Richard de Havering, Walter le Vineter and 
Roger de la Dene and their heirs for the whole tenement which they 
held of the Earl in the said manor on the day this concord was made. 
To have and to hold to Hereward and Rametta of the Earl and his 
heirs during the life of Rametta, rendering therefor yearly twelve pence 
at Michaelmas for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. If 
Rametta died before Hereward, the said manors except the capital 
messuage of Shepwic and twenty librates of land in the said manor 



Divers Counties, Henry III, 163 

shall revert to the Earl and his heirs quit of the heirs of Rametta for 
ever. And the said twenty librates in Shepewic with the capital messu- 
age, according to particulars contained in a charter of the Earl which 
Hereward had of the said twenty librates, shall remain to Hereward, 
to hold of the Earl and his heirs during Hereward's life, rendering there- 
for yearly six pence at Michaelmas for all service, suit of Court, custom 
and demand. After the death of Hereward the said twenty librates and 
the messuage which remain to Hereward as is aforesaid wholly will 
revert to the Earl and his heirs quit of the heirs of Hereward for ever. 
And the Earl granted for himseif and his heirs that henceforth they 
would warrant the said manors to Hereward and Rametta during 
Rametta's life, and after her death the twenty librates and capital 
messuage during Hereward^s life, by the said services against all men. 
Be it known that this fine was made by the assent and wish of the 
King. 



DORSET, DEVON AND NORTHAMPTON. 

(321, old number 8.) At Ivelecestr*, three weeks after the day 
of St. John, between William de Insula, complainant and Reginald de 
Moun and Joan who was the wife of William Bruer', deforciants, of 
two carucates of land in Wauton which Joan before held in dower of 
the inheritance of the said Reginald. Plea of covenant was summoned 
between them. Joan acknowledged the land to be the right of William, 
as that which he had in free marriage with Juliana his wife, daughter 
of the said Reginald, by the gift of Reginald. To have and to hold 
to William and Juliana and the heirs of Juliana of Reginald and his 
heirs for ever, doing thsrefor to the chief lords of that fee for Reginald 
and his heirs all services which to the said land belong. And Reginald 
and his heirs will warrant the land to William and Juliana and the 
heirs of Juliana by the said services against all men for ever. For this 
William granted to Joan two carucates of land in Sidelinge in the 
county of Dorset, namely, whatever the said William held before in the 
said VI 11, without any retainment. To have and to hold to Joan of the 
said William and his heirs during her life, doing therefor all services 
which to that land which remains to her by this fine belong. And 
William and his heirs will warrant the said land in Sydeling to Joan by 
the said services against all men during her life. After her death the 
same shall revert to William and his heirs quit for ever. And more- 
over William remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to 
Reginald and his heirs all his right and claim in the manor of Farewey 
in the county of Devon for ever. 



164 Dorset Fines, 



42 Henry III. (1257-58). 

SOMERSET AND DORSET. 

(347, old number 25.) At Westminster, fifteen days after the 
day of Holy Trinity, between Richard de Havering, complainant, and 
Brian de Gouiz, deforciant, of a moiety of the manor of Longa Kerchel, 
ten acres of meadow in Hamme, and a moiety of the advowson of the 
church of Kerchel. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. 
Brian demised and granted the said tenements to Richard, namely 
whatever he had in the said vill on the day this concord was made, as 
in demesnes, homages, rents, services, vileinages, woods, meadows, 
pastures, gardens and all other things to the said tenements belonging. 
To have and to hold of Brian and his heirs during the life of Richard, 
rendering therefor yearly one pair of white gloves or one penny at 
Easter, and doing therefor suit at the hundred of Nicholas de Molis 
at Knolton for Brian and his heirs, which to the said tenements belong, 
for all service, custom and demand. It shall be lawful for Richard 
during his life to take reasonable estovers in the wood belonging to the 
said moiety of the manor, namely for ** housebote '* and ** haibote*' and 
building, without waste, gift, sale and spoil in the said wood thereof 
to be made. And moreover Brian granted for himself and his heirs 
that his men of Hamme shall mow every year in fence months (tempore 
fenacionis) the said ten acres of meadow at their own expence, and 
raise the hay therefrom arising, during Richard's life. And Brian and 
his heirs will warrant, acquit and defend to Richard during his life the 
aforesaid tenements which remain to him by this fine by the said 
services against all men. After Richard's death the tenements wholly 
will revert to Brian and his heirs quit of the heirs of Richard for ever, 
saving to the heirs or assigns of Richard after his death the crop of the 
lands which Richard in his life sowed, and easement of the houses 
being in the aforesaid moiety of the manor, and pasture to sustain his 
animals for one year if it be necessary, until the goods of Richard can 
be sold. And it shall not be lawful to Richard during his life to give, 
sell, pledge nor in any other way alien any of the said tenements by 
doing which after his decease they should not wholly revert to Brian 
and his heirs quit for ever, according as is aforesaid. For this Richard 
gave and granted to Brian all the lands and tenements which the said 
Richard had in Burghes Burnham and Bren in the county of Somerset 
on the day this concord was made, without any retainment. To have 
and to hold to Brian and his heirs of Richard and his heirs for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, suit of 
Court, relief, aid, custom and demand to Richard and his heirs belong- 
ing, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee, for Richard and 



Divers Counties y Henry III. 165 



his heirs, all other services which to those lands and tenements belong. 
And Richard and his heirs will warrant the said lands and tenements 
to Brian and his heirs by the said services against all men. 

43 Henry III. (1258-59). 

OXFORD, SOMERSET, AND DORSET. 

(368, old number 45.) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter 
day, between William de Monte Acuto and Berca his wife, complain- 
ants, by Walter de Tundreleye, in Berca's place, and Matilda de Wyk', 
deforciant, of the manor of Nortstok* and of a knight's fee in Swane- 
wyk. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. Matilda 
acknowledged the tenements together with that wood called Regge 
Wode and all that pasture towards Selewode which lies beneath the 
grove of Chaunterel and stretches from that park called Perschet* and 
the great road which leads towards Le Sevenstokkes, to be the right of 
William and Berca, as by her gift. To have and to hold to William 
and Berca and the heirs of William of the chief lords of those fees by 
the services which to those tenements belong for ever. Moreover 
Matilda remitted and quit claimed for herself and her heirs to William 
and Berca and the heirs of William all her right and claim in one 
canicate of land in Carsington in county of Oxford, and in the manor of 
Knolle in county of Somerset, and likewise in all other lands and 
tenements which henceforth could come by inheritance to Matilda and 
her heirs in the county of Oxford for ever. For this William and Berca 
gave to Matilda fifty marcs of silver. 

45 Henry III. (1260-61). 
DORSET AND WILTS. 

(391, old number 73.) At Westminster, fifteen days after the 
day of the Purification of the Blessed Mary, between John son of 
Elyas and Leticia his wife, complainants, by Richard de Wyltes' in 
Leticia's place, and Elyas de Deverel and Matilda his wife, deforciants, 
by Walter de Deverel in the place of Elyas, of five carucates of land in 
Muleborn, Wynterborn', Blancmuster, Farham and Hulle Deverel. 
Plea of covenant was summoned between them. Elyas and Matilda 
acknowledged the tenements, except the advowson of the church of 
Farham and the service of John de la More and his heirs for the whole 
tenement which he held of Elyas and Matilda in La More on the day 
this concord was made, to be the right of John, and rendered to him 
two virgates of land in Hull Deverel which the said John de la More 



1 66 Dorset Fines. 



at one time held, and the manor of Farnham except the advowson and 
the service of John de la More and his heirs as is aforesaid, at the 
Court. To have and to hold to John and his heirs of the chief lords of 
those fees by the services which to those tenements belong for ever. 
If Leticia survived John, Elyas living, the manor of Farham except the 
advowson and service as abovesaid, wholly will remain to her, to hold 
of the heirs of the said John during her life by name of dower. For 
this John granted for himself and his heirs that if Elyas survived 
Matilda all the lands and tenements which Elyas and Matilda held in 
the said vills on the day this concord was made wholly shall remain 
to Elyas, to hold during life of the chief lords of those fees by the 
services which to those lands and tenements belong. If Matilda 
survived Elyas all the lands and tenements which Elyas and Matilda 
held in the said vills of the inheritance of the said Matilda on the day 
this concord was made wholly shall remain to Matilda, to hold of the 
chief lords of those fees by the services which thereto belong during her 
life without let or hindrance of John or of his heirs. Then after her 
death they shall wholly remain to the said John and his heirs, to hold 
of the chief lords of those fees by the services which to those lands and 
tenements belong for ever. 

47 Henry III. (1262-63). 

SOMERSET AND DORSET. 

(413, old number 17.) At Ivelcestr', on the morrow of Holy 
Trinity, between War in le Vele, complainant, and Robert de Kyngeswod 
and Matilda his wife, deforciants of one messuage, four and a half acres 
of land, and half an acre of meadow in Kyngeswod in county of 
Somerset, and nine acres of land in Wyke in county of Dorset. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. Robert and Matilda acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of Warin. For this Warin granted 
them to Robert and Matilda for their lives, rendering therefor yearly 
two shillings at Easter for all service, custom and demand to Warin 
and his heirs belonging, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee 
for Warin and his heirs all other services which to the said tenements 
belong. And Warin and his heirs will warrant the same to Robert and 
Matilda during their lives by the said services against all men. After 
the decease of both Robert and Matilda the tenements wholly will revert to 
Warin and his heirs quit of the heirs of Robert and Matilda for ever. 
Be it known that it shall not be lawful for Robert and Matilda to give, 
sell, pledge or in any other manner to alien the said tenements, nor to 
make waste, sale or spoil thereof, by doing which they would not wholly 
revert to Warin and his heirs as is aforesaid for ever. 



Divers Counties, Henry II L 167 

49 Henry III. (1264-65). 

WILTS AND DORSET. 

(417, old number 18.) At Westminster, one month after Easter 
day, between William de la Chaumbre, complainant, and Roger Niceth 
and Isabella his wife, impedients, of two messuages and half a virgate 
of land in Dunedevede. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Roger and Isabella acknowledged the tenement to be 
the right of William, as by their gift. To have and to hold to William 
and his heirs of Roger and Isabella and the heirs of Isabella for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, custom 
and demand, to Roger and Isabella and the heirs of Isabella belonging, 
and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Roger and Isabella 
and the heirs of Isabella all other services which to the said tenement 
belong. And they will warrant the said tenement to William and his 
heirs by the said services against all men for ever. For this William 
granted to Roger and Isabella in exchange half a virgate of land in 
Kyngton in county of Dorset which Ralph le Preste at one time held. 
To have and to hold to Roger and Isabella and the heirs of Isabella of 
William and his beirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at 
Michaelmas for all service, custom and demand to William and his 
heirs belonging, and doing thefefor to the chief lords of that fee for 
William and his heirs all other services which to that land belong. 
And William and his heirs will warrant the said land in Kyngton to 
Roger and Isabella and her heirs by the said services against all men 
for ever. Moreover William gave to Roger and Isabella one sore 
sparrow hawk. 

50 Henry III. (1265-66). 

WILTS, DORSET AND SOUTHAMPTON. 

(421, old number 3.) At Westminster, in the octaves of the Purifica- 
tion of the Blessed Mary, between Alan Plugenet, complainant, by Roger 
de Leonibus, in his place, and Robert Walerand, impedient, of the manors 
of Langeford, Wadden, Wateleye, Kington and Maugereston. Alan ac- 
knowledged the manors, together with the bailiwick of the New Forest 
and the advowsons of the churches of the manors of Waddene, Wateleye 
and Kington to be the right of Robert and rendered the manors of 
Langeford, Wadden and Wateleye together with the said bailiwick and 
advowsons to him at the Court. To have and to hold to Robert and 
the heirs of his body of the chief lords of those fees by the services 
which to those tenements belong, for ever. For this Robert granted 
to Alan the manors of Kington and Maugereston, the manor of Thome- 



1 68 Dorset Fines. 



ton in county of Dorset and two carucates of land in Bocheresfeld 
and Thistede in county of Southampton, and advowson of Thistede 
church. To have and to hold to Alan and the heirs of his body of 
Robert and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one sore sparrow 
hawk at the feast of St. Peter ad Vincula for all service, custom and 
demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of these fees for Robert 
and his heirs all other services which to those manors belong. If 
Robert should die without heirs of his body, Alan surviving, then the 
tenements which remain to Robert by this fine as is aforesaid, wholly 
will revert to Alan and his heirs quit, to hold with the tenements which 
remain to him by this fine of the other heirs of Robert by the said 
services for ever. If Alan should die without heirs of his body then the 
tenements which remain to him by this fine wholly shall revert to 
Robert and his heirs, to hold together with the tenements which remain 
to him, as is aforesaid, of the chief lords of those fees by the services 
which to those tenements belong for ever. 



DORSET AND SOUTHAMPTON. 

(422, old number 4.) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day 
of St. John Baptist, between Henry son of Elyas, complainant, and 
Reginald de Horton and Margery his wife, deforciants, of one messuage 
and a fifth part of one carucate of land in Kyngeston. Plea of covenant 
was summoned between them. Reginald and Margery acknowledged 
the said tenements to be the right of Henry, as by their gift. To have 
and to hold to Henry and his heirs of Reginald and Margery and the 
heirs of Margery for ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at 
Michaelmas for all service, custom and demand, and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of that fee for them all other services which to the said 
tenements belong. And Reginald and Margery and the heirs of Margery 
will warrant the tenements to Henry and his heirs by the said servicbs 
against all men for ever. For this Henry gave and granted to Reginald 
and Margery one messuage, one virgate and a half of land in Cherleton 
juxta Wymburn and one messuage and eighteen acres of land and four 
acres of meadow in Hardelbrigge which William Bakun, John Peytevin 
and Florencia his wife at one time held. To have and to hold to 
Reginald and Margery and their heirs of Henry and his heirs for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, custom 
and demand. And Henry and his heirs will warrant, acquit and defend 
to Reginald and Margery and their heirs the tenements which remain 
to them by this fine, as is aforesaid, by the said service against all men 
for ever. 



Divers Counties, Henry II L 169 

52 Henry III. (j2tfj-(&amp;). 

WILTS AND DORSET. 

(434, old number 24.) At Wilton, in the octaves of the Purifi- 
cation of the Blessed Mary, between Master John de Brideport, com- 
plainant, and the Prior of Ophanene, deforciant, of one messuage in 
Brideport in county of Dorset and the advowson of the church of the 
Blessed Mar&gt;' in the said vill. Plea of covenant was summoned between 
them. The Prior acknowledged the messuage and advowson to be the 
right of John, as by the Prior's gift. To have and to hold to John and 
his heirs of the Prior and his successors and his church of the Blessed 
Mary of Ophanene for ever, rendering therefor yearly to the Prior and 
his successors one pair of white gloves of one penny's value, or one 
penny at Easter, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for the 
Prior and his successors and his said church all other services which to 
the said messuage and advowson belong, for all service, custom and 
demand. And the Prior and his successors and his church will warrant 
the messuage and advowson to John and his heirs by the said service 
against all men for ever. 



SOUTHAMPTON AND DORSET. 

(440, old number 21.) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy 
Trinity, between Robert Walerand, complainant, by Jordan de Wyvill 
in his place, and Robert, Master of the Hospital of Portsmouth, im- 
pedient, of one messuage and two carucates of land in Parva Kyngton 
and Magna Kyngton. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between 
them. The Master acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Robert, as by the gift of the Master and brothers of the said Hospital. 
To have and to hold to Robert and his heirs of the Master and his suc- 
cessors and the brothers of the Hospital for ever, doing therefor to the 
chief lords of those fees for the Master and his successors and the 
brothers all services which to those tenements belong. And they will 
warrant the tenements to Robert and his heirs by the said services 
against all men for ever. For this Robert granted to them in exchange 
a moiety of the manor of Lasseham with the advowson of the church 
of Lasseham. To have and to hold to the Master and his successors 
and the brothers of the Hospital of Robert and his heirs for ever, doing 
therefor to the chief lords of those fees for Robert and his heirs all 
services which to that tenement belong. And Robert and his heirs will 
warrant to them the said moiety and advowson by the said services 
against all men for ever. 



170 Dorset Fines. 



VARIOUS COUNTIES 

{only those for Dorset selected). 

XI Henry III. (1226-27). 

(36) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Roger de Vilers, plaintiff, and Peter de Russeous, tenent, of the 
manor of Tarente. Roger acknowledged the manor to be the right of 
Peter, and remitted and quit claimed the same for himself and his heirs 
to Peter and his heirs for ever. For this Peter gave to Roger de Vilers 
four score marcs of silver. Be it known that if Roger or his heirs shall 
hold any deed or muniment of the said land against the said Peter or 
his heirs at any time they shall be held for naught (they shall be worth- 
less, pro nullis habebuntur). 



24 Henry III. (1239-40). 

(54) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of the Purifi- 
cation of the Blessed Mary, between Matilda, Abbess of Tarent, 
complainant, by brother William de Tarent in her place, and John de 
Mares and Agatha his wife, impedients, by Alexander de Mares in 
Agatha's place, of the manor of Haunford. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned between them. John and Agatha acknowledged the 
whole manor with the advowson of the church to be the right of 
the Abbess and her church, as by their gift. To have and to hold to 
the Abbess and other Abbesses who succeed her, and her church, of 
John and Agatha and the heirs of Agatha in free and perpetual alms for 
ever, rendering therefor yearly ten pounds sterling at two terms, namely, 
one hundred shillings at Easier and Michaelmas for all, save foreign, 
service. And John and Agatha and the heirs of Agatha will warrant 
the manor to the Abbess and her successors and her church as their 
free and perpetual alms by the said service against all people for ever. 
For this the Abbess gave to John and Agatha one hundred marcs of 
silver. This concord was made between them, saving to Matilda who 
was the wife of Geoffrey de Cerland a third part of the said manor, to 
hold during life by name of dower and after her death it shall revert 
to the Abbess and her successors and her church of Tarent quit for 
ever. Be it known that Matilda was present at the Court and acknow- 
ledged that she had no claim in the said third part except by name of 
dower. 



Various Counties ^ Henry III. 171 

33 Henry III. (1248-49). 

(87) At Wyndesor, on the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, 
between Matilda, Abbess of Tarent, complainant, by brother Stephen 
in her place, and Ralph le Bret, impedient, of a moiety of the advowson 
of the church of Vpwymburn. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Ralph acknowledged the moiety to be the right of the 
Abbess and her church of Tarente, as by the gift of Ralph. To have 
and to hold to thp Abbess and her successors and her church in free, 
pure and perpetual alms for ever. And Ralph and his heirs will 
warrant the said moiety of the church to the Abbess and her successors 
and her church of Tarente as free, pure, and perpetual alms against all 
people for ever. And the Abbess received Ralph and his heirs into all 
benefits and orisons which henceforth should be done in her church 
at Tarente for ever. 



34 Henry III. (1249-50). 

(93) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Nicholas de Turri, complainant, and William Peverel, impedient, of 
half a hide of land in Berewyk and two virgates of land and a half in 
Sturtel. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
William acknowledged the land, namely, whatever he had in the said 
vills without any retainment to be the right of Nicholas, as by the gift 
of William. To have and to hold to Nicholas and his heirs of William 
and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of white gloves 
or one halfpenny at the feast of All Saints, for all service, suit of Court 
and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of those fees as much 
foreign service as belongs to so much land of the same fees in the same 
vills. Moreover William granted for himself and his heirs that if 
Nicholas died without heir of his body, or did not give that land to any 
one, that John the brother of Nicholas and his heirs may have and hold 
the whole land of William and his heirs and of the chief lords of those 
fees by the said services as is aforesaid for ever. And William and his 
heirs will warrant, acquit and defend the said land to Nicholas and the 
heirs of his body, or to him to whom he may have given that land and 
his heirs, or to the said John and his heirs by the said services against 
all people for ever. For this Nicholas gave to William forty marcs. 



35 Henry III. (1250-51). 

(99) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St Michael, 



172 Dorset Fines. 



between Philip, Abbot of Roucestr', plaintiff, and Margery de Rypariis, 
Ralph de Nevill and Ela his wife, and Hugh de Plessetis and Isabella 
his wife, who Albreda de Bassingeburn vouched to warrant and who 
warranted to her eight carucates of land in Brigeford. The Abbot 
remitted and quit claimed for himself and his successors and his church 
of Roucestr' to Margery, Ralph and Ela, Hugh and Isabella and the 
heirs of Margery, Ela and Isabella all his right and claim in the said 
land for ever. For this they gave to the Abbot forty-five marcs of 
silver. 

(102) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between William le Chanu and Philippa his wife, William de 
Cerde and Alicia his wife, Richard de Therstewode and Agatha his 
wife and Margery de Vffewell, plaintiffs, by the said Richard in their 
place, and Peter de BouWode, tenent, of two parts of one messuage and 
one carucate of land in Leucom and two parts of thirty acres of land in 
Bouwode. And between the above said plaintiffs and the said Peter 
who Margery de Ivythorne vouched to warrant, and who warranted to 
him a third part of one messuage, one carucate and thirty acres of land 
in the said vills. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned between 
them. William le Chanu and Philippa, William de Cerde and Alicia, 
Richard and Agatha and Margery remitted and quit claimed for them- 
selves and the heirs of Philippa, Alicia, Agatha and Margery to 
Peter and his heirs, all their right and claim in the said messuage 
and land for ever. For this Peter gave to them fifty marcs of 



silver. 



36 Henry III. (1251-52). 

(106) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between 
Robert Belet, plaintiff, and Elyas de Rabeyn and Matilda daughter of 
Stephen de Bayocis, tenents, by Walter de Burgys in Matilda's place, 
of a fourth part of one knighfs fee in Netherlym. Elyas and Matilda 
acknowledged the same to be the right of Robert. For this Robert 
granted it to them. To have and to hold to Elyas and Matilda and 
their heirs of Robert and his heirs for ever, doing therefor the service of 
a fourth part of a knight, for all service, custom and demand. If 
Matilda died without heirs of her body the fourth part will wholly re- 
main to the nearest heirs of Elyas, to hold of Robert and his heirs by 
the said service for ever. And Robert and his heirs will warrant the 
said fourth part to Elias and Matilda by the said service against all 
men for ever. Moreover Elyas and Matilda gave to Robert forty marcs 
of silver. 



Unknown Counties, Henry III, 173 



UNKNOWN COUNTIES (? DORSET). 

4 Henry III. (12x9-20). 

(27) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Alan Basset,, complainant, and Walter de Dayvill, deforciant, of Haifa 
knight's fee in Winterburn. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Walter acknowledged the same to be the right of Alan, 
as by the gift of Walter, and granted that Alan and his heirs may have 
and hold the same of the chief lords of that fee by the service which to 
it belongs. And Walter and his heirs will warrant the whole of the 
said half a knight's fee to Alan and his heirs against all people who can 
claim a right to themselves being of the stock (de stipite) of the said 
Walter. For this Alan gave to Walter sixty marcs of silver. 

XX Henry III. (1226-27). 

(44) At Wiltun, fifteen days after Easter day, between Robert 
son of Robert de Berwyke, plaintiff, and Alan Basset, tenent of two 
virgates and a half of land and three messuages in Berewyk. Assize 
ofmort ancestor was summoned between them. Alan acknowledged 
and granted to Robert one virgate of the same land which belongs to 
Hull. To have and to hold to Robert and his heirs of Alan and his 
heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly four shillings at four terms, 
namely twelve pence at Nativity of St. John Baptist, Michaelmas, the 
Nativity, and Easter for all, save foreign, service. For this Robert re- 
mitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Alan and his heirs 
for ever all his right and claim in the surplusage of the whole of the 
said land. 

20 Henry III. (1235-36). 

(64) At Wilton, Tuesday next after the conversion of St. Paul, 
between Margery who was the wife of Hamo de Hacche, plaintiff, and 
Gilbert Basset, tenent, by Robert Kempe in his place, of three virgates 
of land in Winterburn. Margery acknowledged the whole of the said 
land to be the right of Gilbert. To have and to hold to Gilbert and 
his heirs of Margery and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly 
two shillings at Easter for all service and demand. For this Gilbert 
gave to Margery four marcs and a half of silver. 

(65) At Wynton, Monday next after the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Gilbert Basset, plaintiff, and William de 
Ponte Arche, tenent, of two carucates of land in Neweton. Recog- 
nizance of the great assize was summoned between them. Gilbert 



174 Dorset Fines. 



remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to William and his 
heirs all his right and claim in the said land for ever. For this 
William gave to Gilbert two hundred and sixty marcs of silver. If 
Gilbert or his heirs henceforth shall produce (proferant) any deeds or 
muniments against this fine, they shall go for nought (pro nichilo 
penitus habebuntur). 



26 Henry III. (1241-42). 

(81)* At Portesmouth; fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Matilda, Abbess of Tharent, complainant, by brother William de 
Tharent in her place, and Robert de Pavill and Petronilla his wife, 
deforciants, by Eustace de Gerard vill and Elyas son of Peter in their 
place, of one carucate of land in Tharent Kaynes. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned between them. Robert and Petronilla acknow- 
ledged the land to be the right of the Abbess and her church of Tharent, 
as by their gift. To have and to hold to the Abbess and other Ab- 
besses who succeed her, and her church aforesaid in free and perpetual 
alms, doing therefor for Robert and Petronilla and the heirs of Petro- 
nilla for all service, custom and demand the service which to the said 
land belongs. And Robert and Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla 
will warrant the said land to the Abbess and her successors and her 
church by the said service against all men for ever. For this the 
Abbess gave and granted to Robert and Petronilla eight virgates of 
land in Stanton G . . . (Griselby) in the county of Huntingdon. 
Moreover the Abbess granted to Robert and Petronilla one toft and 
fifteen acres of meadow in the said vill, and the homage and whole 
service of Thomas Dalket in respect of one virgate of land which he 
held of her in the said vill. To have and to hold to Robert and 
Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla of the Abbess and her successors. 
And the Abbess and her successors will warrant all the said land with 
the vileins, toft and meadow and homage anjd service of the said Thomas, 
to Robert and Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla by the said service 
against all men for ever. Moreover the Abbess gave and granted to 
Matilda, daughter of Robert and Petronilla for her marriage all the 
residue which she had in the said vill of Staunton and in Hilton, to have 
and to hold to Matilda and her heirs of the Abbess and her successors 
and her church for ever, rendering therefor one pound of pepper at 
Michaelmas for all service, custom and demand. And the Abbess and 
her successors will warrant the said residue to Matilda and her heirs by 
the said service against all men for ever. 

^ Note this is very similar to the fine of same day and date No. 175 Divers Counties. 



Unknown Count us, Henry TIL 175 

(82) At Portesmouth, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Matilda, Abbess of Tharent, by brother William de Tharent in her 
place, complainant, and Robert de Paveir and Petronilla his wife, 
deforciants, of one canicate of land in Tharent Kaynes. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Robert and Petro- 
nilla acknowledged the land to be the right of the Abbess and her 
church of Tharent, as by their gift. To have and to hold to the 
Abbess and other Abbesses who succeed her and her church in free 
and perpetual alms, doing therefor for Robert and Petronilla and the 
heirs of Petronilla for all service, custom and demand, the service 
which to the said land belongs. And Robert and Petronilla and the 
heirs of Petronilla will warrant, acquit and defend the said land to the 
Abbess and her successors and her church by the said service against 
all men for ever. For this the Abbess gave and granted to Robert 
and Petronilla eight virgates of land in Stanton Grisebi in the county 
of Huntingdon. And moreover the Abbess granted to Robert and 
Petronilla one toft and fifteen acres of meadow in the said vill, and 
the homage and whole service of Thomas Dalket and of one virgate 
of land which he held of her in the said vill. To have and to hold 
to Robert and Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla of the Abbess and 
her successors, rendering therefor yearly one pound  of wax at Tharent 
at Michaelmas for all service, custom and demand. And the Abbess 
and all Abbesses who succeed her will warrant all the said land with 
the vileins, toft and meadow and the homage and service of the said 
Thomas, to Robert and Petronilla and the heirs of Petronilla by the 
said service against all men for ever. Moreover, the Abbess granted 
to Matilda daughter of the said Robert and Petronilla for her marriage 
all the residue which she had in the said vill of Staunton and in Hilton. 
To have and to hold to Matilda and her heirs of the Abbess and her 
successors and her church for ever, rendering therefor one pound of 
pepper at Michaelmas for all service, custom and demand. And the 
Abbess and her successors will warrant the said residue to Matilda 
and her heirs by the said service against all men for ever. 

(83) At Portesmouth, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Matilda, Abbess of Tharent, by brother William de Tarent in her 
place, and Robert de Pavell and Petronilla his wife, deforciants, of 
one carucate of land in Tarent Kaynes, &amp;c. 

[Note.  This is a duplicate of the last. Both Nos. 81 and 82 are 
Indentures of fines (not the Foot, see Introduction vii.), but it is clear 
they are not the Indentures of which fine No. 175, Divers Counties, is 
the foot, though they were all made on the same day. The explana- 

* The pound of wax not mentioned in previous Bne, otherwise similar in all respects. 



176 Dorset Fines. 



tion of it may be that this fine was never carried out, and the Indentures 
were therefore retained and not handed to the parties, but that fine No. 
81 was made instead.] 

31 Henry III. (1246-47). 

(98) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Fulco, Bishop of London, complainant, Baldwin de Furmeseles 
in his place, and Bartholomew de Turbervill, impedient, by Walter 
Coyfe, in his place, of the manor of Melebyr'. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned between them. Bartholomew acknowledged the whole 
manor to be the right of the Bishop, as by the gift of Bartholomew. 
To have and to hold to the Bishop and his heirs or assigns of Bartholo- 
mew and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly ten pounds 
sterling at Michaelmas for suit of Court, custom and demand, and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for all other services which 
to the said manor belong. And Bartholomew and his heirs will warrant 
the said manor to the Bishop and his heirs and assigns by the said 
service against all men for ever. For this the Bishop gave to Bartholo- 
mew seven score marcs of silver. Be it known that the Bishop for 
himself and heirs or assigns undertook to render for Bartholomew at the 
King's Exchequer at Westminster one hundred and two pounds, in 
which Bartholomew was held to him by a fine of his father, namely, the 
rent for ten years, and forty shillings for the rent of the eleventh year 
within which term the Bishop and his heirs or assigns did not do the 
aforesaid service of ten pounds to Bartholomew and his heirs. And in 
the eleventh year the Bishop, or his heirs or his assigns, pays eight 
pounds and thenceforth each year ten pounds as is aforesaid. 



?4i Henry HI. (1256-57). 

(132) At Westminster,* between Beatrice who was the wife of 
Bartholomew de Turbervile, plaintiff, and John de Turbervile who Fulco, 
Bishop of London, vouched to warrant and who warranted to him one 
third part of the manor of Melebir Thurbervile, which the said Beatrice 
claimed to be her reasonable dower as of the free tenement which was 
of Bartholomew at one time her husband in the said manor. Beatrice 
remitted and quit claimed for herself to John and his heirs the right 
and claim she had in the said third part by name of dower for ever. 
For this John granted to Beatrice a yearly rent of ten pounds in which 
the Bishop is held to John and his heirs for the said manor by 

* No date given, but see end. 



Unknown Counties, Henry III, 177 

fine made in the Court of the King between the said Bishop and 
Bartholomew de Thurbervil father of the said John whose heir he is, 
to be received yearly by Beatrice during her life by the hand of the 
Bishop and his heirs or by the hand of all others who hereafter shall 
hold the said manor at Michaelmas. Provided nevertheless that 
Beatrice shall not receive for the term of Michaelmas 41 Henry III. 
more than sixty shillings and thenceforth each year she shall receive 
the said ten pounds at Michaelmas. After the death of Beatrice the 
said rent of ten pounds shall wholly revert to John and his heirs quit 
for ever. And the Bishop was present by his attorney and granted this 
concord. And if the Bishop and his heirs or any other who hereafter shall 
hold the manor shall make default in payment of the rent at any term, it 
shall be lawful for Beatrice during her life to distrain them by their 
chattels found in the said manor until the full payment of the money 
in arrear at that term. Be it known that the said Bishop paid to 
Beatrice the said sixty shillings which he owed to hr at the said feast 
of St. Michael 41 Henry HI. 



12 



178 Dorset Fines. 



2 Edward I. (1273-74). 

(i) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hillary, between Richard 
Joye, complainant, and Amicia Gerard of Westeport, impedient, of a 
moiety of one messuage and one hide of land in Westeport. Amicia 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Richard, as by her gift. 
To have and to hold to Richard and his heirs of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services belonging to that tenement for ever. For this 
Richard granted to Amicia one messuage in Warham which Gerard le 
Erode once held. To have and to hold to Amicia and her heirs of 
Richard and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at 
Easter for all service, custom and demand. And Richard and his heirs 
will warrant to Amicia and her heirs the said messuage by the said 
service against all men for ever. 

(2) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter-day, between Juliana, 
Abbess of Schafton, complainant, by John de Stanes in her place, and 
Hugh de Blyndefeld, deforciant, of the advowson of the church of St. 
James de Schafton. Assize of last presentation was summoned between 
them. Hugh acknowledged the advowson to be the right of the Abbess 
and her church of Schafton and remitted and quit claimed it for himself 
and his heirs to the Abbess and her successors and her church for ever. 
For this the Abbess received Hugh and his heirs into all benefits and 
orisons which henceforth should be done in her church for ever. 

(3) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, between 
Robert de Celario, plaintiff, and John Skybard, tenent, of two messuages 
in Brideport. John acknowledged them to be the right of Robert, and 
rendered them to him, except two stalls, at the Court, and remitted and 
quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Robert and his heirs for ever. 
For this Robert granted to John and Matilda his wife the said two stalls, 
namely, that stall which Stephen Aylmund once held and that stall 
which Richard Cuf and Richard de Ramesham once held. To have 
and to hold to John and Matilda during their lives of Robert and his 
heirs, rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, 
custom and demand. And Robert and his heirs will warrant the said 
two stalls to John and Matilda during their lives by the said service 
against all men. After the decease of John and Matilda the stalls shall 
wholly revert to Robert and his heirs quit of the heirs of both John and 
Matilda for ever. 

3 Edward I. (1274-75). 

(4) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hillary, between 
Symon de Blachinton, complainant, and John Pevcrel, impedient, of one 



4 Edward L (1275-76). 179 

hundred solidates of rent in Bradeford Peverel. John acknowledged and 
granted for himself and his heirs that henceforth they would render 
yearly to Symon during his life the said rent, to be taken by the hands 
of John and his heirs from those ten virgates of land in Bradeford 
Peverel which Nicholas Bombere, Gilbert Bleithe, William Bleithe, 
John Hereberd, Adam Neweman, John Prest, Reginald Sidher, Richard 
Pypere, Nicholas Peny and Richard Le Bercher once held in vileinage 
of John in the said vill, or by the hands of all others who henceforth 
shall hold the said land, at two terms, namely a moiety at the Nativity 
of St. John Baptist and Nativity of Our Lord. In default of payment 
of the said money at any term, Symon may distrain them by all their 
chattels found upon the said lands until full payment of the money in 
arrear for that term be made. After the decease of Symon, John and 
his heirs shall go quit of the payment of the said hundred shillings 
yearly, for ever. 

(5) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between William 
Atte Croyz, complainant, and Edward Swym and Alice his wife, 
deforciants, of one messuage and ten acres of land in Stoke Abbots. 
Plea of covenant was summoned between them. Edward and Alice 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of William, as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to William and his heirs of Edward and Alice and 
the heirs of Alice for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of white 
gloves or one penny at Michaelmas for all service, custom and demand, 
and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Edward and Alice 
and the heirs of Alice all other services which to that tenement belong. 
And Edward and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant the tenement 
to William and his heirs against all men for ever. For this William 
gave to Edward and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

4 Edward I. (1275-76). 

(6) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Matilda, 
Abbess of Tarente, complainant, by Geoffrey de Stebhampton in her 
place, and Walter de Wyke, deforciant, of customs and services which 
the said Abbess demands from Walter for the tenement he holds of her 
in Gussich All Saints, namely, for five virgates of land, wherefor the 
Abbess demanded of Walter that he should render to hej yearly one 
pound of pepper and one pair of gilt spurs for the said tenement, which 
services Walter recognized. Walter acknowledged and granted for 
himself and his heirs that henceforth they would render yearly to the 
Abbess and her successors and her church of Tarent for the said tene- 
ment, fourteen pence at Michaelmas. And likewise do such foreign 
service as belongs to so much land of that fee in the said vill for all 



i8o Dorset Fines. 



service, custom and demand. Moreover Walter gave to the Abbess 
five shillings for her expences. For this the Abbess granted for 
herself and her successors that henceforth they would warrant the said 
tenement to Walter and his heirs by the said services against all men 
for ever. 

(7) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hillary, between William 
son of Alice de Dorsestre and Alice his wife, complainants, and Andrew 
Toward and Agnes his wife, impedients, of one messuage, two virgates 
and a half of land and two acres and a half of meadow in Tatton. Plea 
of warranty of deed was summoned between them. Andrew and Agnes 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of William and Alice, as by 
the gift of Andrew and Agnes. To have and to hold to William and 
Alice and the heirs of William of Andrew and Agnes and the heirs of 
Agnes for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pound of pepper at Michael- 
mas and doing therefor so much foreign service as belongs to such tene- 
ment of that fee in that will for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand. And Andrew and Agnes and the heirs of Agnes will warrant 
the said tenement to William and Alice and the heirs of William by the 
said services against all men for ever. For this William and Alice gave 
to Andrew and Agnes thirty-two and a half marcs of silver. 

(8) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between Roger de 
Bosco and Margery his wife, complainants, and Robert de Bosco, de- 
forciant, of the manors of Chillefrome and Ryngstede and the advowsons 
of the churches of those manors. Plea of covenant was summoned be- 
tween them. Robert acknowledged the manors and advowsons to be the 
right of Roger and Margery, as by his gift. For this Roger and Margery 
granted them to Robert. To have and to hold to him, of Roger and 
Margery and their heirs during his life, rendering therefor yearly one 
penny at Easter for all service, custom and demand. And after the 
decease of Robert they shall wholly revert to Roger and Margery and 
the heirs of Roger quit, to hold of the chief lords of those fees by the 
services which to those manors belong. If Roger died without heirs 
begotten of Margery, she surviving, then the manors and advowsons 
will remain to her, to hold of the other heirs of Roger by the aforesaid 
service during her life. After the decease of Margery they shall wholly 
remain to the right heirs of Roger, to hold of the chief lords of those 
fees by the said services for ever. 

(9) At Westminster, fifteen days after Piaster day, between Henry de 
Haddon and Amicia his wife, complainants, by Baldewyn de Haddon in 
their place, and Ralph de Stock', impedient, of one messuage and two 
carucates of land in Caundel Haddone. Ralph acknowledged the tene- 
ment to be the right of Henry and Amicia, as by his gift. To have and 
to hold to Henry and Amicia and the heirs of Henr^' of the chief lords of 



4 Edward /. (1275-76). r8i 



that fee by the services which to that tenement belong for ever. For 
this Henry and Amicia gave to Ralph forty marcs of silver. 

(10) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Christiana 
who was the wife of Symon Robbe, plaintiff, and John de Strode, tenent, 
by Hugh de Beymanystre in his place, of one messuage and one carucate 
of land in Woth Fraunceys. Christiana acknowledged the messuage 
and land to be the right of John and remitted and quit claimed the same 
for herself and her heirs to John and his heirs for ever. For this John 
gave to Christiana twenty pounds sterling. 

(11) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between William Gylle of Lym, complainant and Alured de la Porte 
and Wymarka his wife, deforciants, of one messuage in Lym. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. Alured and Wymarka acknow- 
ledged the said messuage to be the right of William as by their 
gift. To have and to hold to William and his heirs of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which to that messuage belong, for ever. 
For this William gave to Alured and Wymarka one hundred shillings 
sterling. 

(12) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Richard 
de la Haule, complainant, and Hugh de la Haule, impedient, of one mill, 
fifty-eight acres of land in Fyihyde. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned between them. Hugh acknowledged the same to be the right 
of Richard, as by the gift of Hugh. To have and to hold to Richard and 
his heirs of Hugh and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one 
penny at Easter for all service, custom and demand, and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of that fee for Hugh and his heirs all other services which 
to that tenement belong. And Hugh and his heirs will warrant the 
mill and land to Richard and his heirs by the said services against 
all men for ever. For this Richard gave to Hugh twenty marcs of 
silver. 

(13) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Richard 
del Boys, complainant, and Thomas Belet, impedient, by kichard de 
Catebyr' in his place, of one messuage and one carucate of land in 
Winterburne Stepelton. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. Thomas acknowledged the tenement to be the right 
of Richard, as by the gift of Thomas. To have and to hold to Richard 
and his heirs of Thomas and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly 
one penny at Easter, and doing therefor so much foreign service as 
belongs to such tenement of the same fee in the same will for all 
service, custom and demand. Thomas and his heirs will warrant 
the tenement to Richard and his heirs, by the said service against 
all men for ever. For this Richard gave to Thomas forty marcs of 
silver. 



l82 Dorset Fines, 



5 Edward I. (1276-77). 

(14) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hillary, between Brian 
de Gouyz, senior, complainant, and Brian de Gouyz, junior, Henry and 
John his brothers, deforciants, of one carucate of land in Durwyneston 
and Knytteton. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. 
Brian senior acknowledged the land, namely, whatever he before had in 
the said vills without any retainment to be the right of Brian junior, 
Henry and John as by his gift. To have and to hold to Brian junior, 
Henry and John and the heirs of the body of Brian junior, of Brian 
senior during his life, rendering therefor yearly twenty pounds sterling 
at two terms, namely, a moiety at Easter and Michaelmas, for all ser- 
vice, custom and demand. After the decease of Brian senior they shall 
go quit of the said payment, and they shall hold the said land of the 
heirs of Brian senior for ever, doing therefor the service of one knight's 
fee for all service, custom and demand. Should Brian junior happen to 
die without heir of his body, Brian senior, Henry and John being still 
alive, then the said land wholly shall remain to Henry and John and the 
heirs of the body of Henry to hold of Brian senior during his life and 
after the decease of Brian senior of the heirs of Brian senior by the said 
services as is aforesaid for ever. Should Henry die without heirs of his 
body, Brian senior and John being still alive, then the said land after 
the decease of Brian junior and of his heirs wholly shall remain to John 
and the heirs of his body, to hold of Brian senior during his life and 
after the decease of Brian senior of the heirs of Brian senior by the said 
services as is aforesaid for ever. And Brian senior will warrant the 
said land to Brian junior and his said heirs or to Henry and John and 
their said heirs if Brian junior died without heir of his body, by the said 
service of twenty pounds against all men during his life, and after his 
decease his heirs will warrant the same to Brian junior, Henry and John 
and their heirs by the said service of a knight^s fee against all men for 
ever. For this Brian junior, Henry and John gave to Brian senior one 
sore sparrow hawk. 

\Endor$ed?^ And Roger de Esse son of Roger de Esse puts in his 
claim. 

[Note.  Also endorsed on this fine which was probably the outside 
fine of an old bundle " 20 feet of chirographs for the term of St. Hillary 
in the 5th year of the reign of King Edward, in the time of William de 
Middleton clerk of the Bench".] 

(15) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Ingeramus le Waleys and Alice his wife, com- 
plainants, and Ralph Basset of Drayton, deforciant, of the manor of 
Melecumbe. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. Ingera- 



6 Edward /. (1277-78). 183 

mus and Alice acknowledged the manor to be the right of Ralph and 
remitted and quit claimed the same to Ralph and his heirs for ever. 
For this Ralph gave to them one hundred pounds sterling. 

(16) At Westminster, three weeks after Easter day, between Richard, 
Abbot of Gresteng, complainant, by brother Reginald, Prior of Wylmyn- 
ton, his monk in his place, and John de Insula, deforciant, of customs 
and services which the Abbot demands of John in respect of the free 
tenement he holds of the Abbot in Vpwymburn, and wherefor the Abbot 
demands that John should render to him yearly twenty shillings, which 
service John recognizes. The Abbot remitted and quit claimed for him- 
self and his successors and his church of Cresteng to John and his heirs 
all the right and claim he had in the said service for ever, and granted 
that henceforth John and his heirs may hold the said tenement of him 
and his successors, namely, all that tenement which William de Insula, 
father of John whose heir he is, once held of the fee of the said Abbot in 
the said vill, rendering therefor yearly one pound of wax at Michaelmas 
for all service, custom and demand. And the Abbot and his successors 
will warrant the tenement to John and his heirs by the said service 
against all men for ever. For this John gave to the Abbot twelve 
pounds sterling. 

6 Edward I. (1277-78). 

(17) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Henry de Mymmes, complainant, and Richard de Feltham and 
Agatha his wife, deforciants, of one messuage and fourteen acres and a 
half of land in Middelstrete. Plea of covenant was summoned between 
them. Henry acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Agatha. 
For this Richard and Agatha granted it to Henry. To have and to hold 
to Henry during his life, of Richard and Agatha and the heirs of Agatha, 
rendering therefor yearly two quarters of wheat and two quarters of 
barley at Michaelmas for all service, custom and demand. And Richard 
and Agatha and the heirs of Agatha will warrant the tenement to Henry 
during life by the said service against all men. After the decease of 
Henry the tenement wholly shall revert to Richard and Agatha and the 
heirs of Agatha quit of the heirs of Henry. To hold of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which to the said tenement belong for ever. 

(18) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. Martin, between Richard 
de Boys, complainant, and Roger Belet, impedient, by Richard de 
Cadebyr' in his place, of two carucates of land in Werdeford and 
Wynterburn. Roger acknowledged the land to be the right of Richard, 
as by the gift of Roger. For this Richard granted it to Roger. 
To have and to hold to Roger during life of Richard and his heirs. 



184 Dorset Fines, 



rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, custom 
and demand. After the decease of Roger the land wholly will revert 
to Richard and his heirs quit of the heirs of Roger, to hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which to the said land belong for ever. 
Moreover Richard gave to Roger one hundred pounds sterling. Be it 
known that Roger during his life may not make waste, sale, destruction 
or spoil of the houses, woods, gardens, turbaries or vileins to the said 
land belonging, whereby after his death the land should not wholly 
revert to Richard and his heirs as is aforesaid. 

7 Edward I. (1278-79). 

(19) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, 
between William Russel, complainant^ and Ralph Russel, impedient, 
of the manor of Kyngeston. Ralph acknowledged the manor to be the 
right of William, as by the gift of Ralph. For this William granted it 
to Ralph. To have and to hold to Ralph during life, of William and 
his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, 
custom and demand to William and his heirs belonging, and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for William and his heirs all other 
services which to the said manor belong. After the decease of Ralph 
the manor wholly shall revert to William and his heirs quit of the heirs 
of Ralph, to hold of the King and his heirs by the services which to 
that manor belong for ever. This concord was made by the assent and 
wish of the King who agreed thereto. 

[Endorsed,] And James Russell put in his claim. 

(20) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, 
between Roger, Abbot of Bynedon, by brother Maurice de Cerne, his 
monk, in his place, and William de Wylburham and Emma his wife, 
impedients, of one messuage and one carucate of land in Knitteton, 
Forshull and Wymfrede. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned 
between them. William and Emma acknowledged the same to be the 
right of the Abbot and his church of Bynedone, as by their gift. To 
have and to hold to the Abbot and his successors and his church of 
William and Emma during their lives, rendering therefor yearly one 
hundred shillings sterling at four terms, namely, twenty-five shillings 
at the Nativity of our Lord, Easter, Nativity of St. John Baptist and 
St. Michael for all service, custom and demand, doing therefor to the 
chief lords of that fee for William and Emma all other services which 
to that messuage and land belong. And after the decease of William 
and Emma the Abbot and his successors and his church shall go quit 
of the payment of the one hundred shillings yearly, and shall hold the 
messuage and land of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 



8 Edward I, (1279-80). 185 

to the same belong for ever. And William and Emma granted for 
themselves and the heirs of Emma that they will warrant the messuage 
and land to the Abbot and his successors and his church against all 
men for ever. For this the Abbot granted for himself and his succes- 
sors and his church that henceforth they would find one monk every 
year to daily celebrate at the altar of St. Michael within his aforesaid 
church for the souls of William and Emma and the heirs and ancestors 
of Emma for ever. 

(21) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between Richard de Calewey, plaintiff, by Thomas Jolivet in his place, 
and Richard de Candevere, tenent of one messuage and one carucate 
of land in Cherleton. Richard de Caleweye acknowledged the tene- 
ments to be the right of Richard de Candevere, as by the gift of William 
de Calewey brother of Richard de Calewey whose heir he (Richard) is, 
and remitted and quit claimed the same for himself and his heirs to 
Richard de Candevere and his heirs for ever. For this Richard de 
Candevere gave to Richard de Calewey twenty marcs of silver. 

8 Edward I. (1279-80). 

(22) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Roger de Chaumpayne, complainant, and Peter de 
Chaumpayne, deforciant, of seven marcs of rent in Wynterbourn 
Thomaston, which Roger de Pydele was used to render yearly to 
Peter in repect of a moiety of the manor of Wynterbourn Thomas- 
ton which he held for term of his life of the said Peter during 
Peter's life on the day this concord was made. Plea of cove- 
nant was summoned between them. Peter granted to Roger de 
Chaumpayne the said rent, namely, the whole service of Roger de 
Pydele which he was before accustomed to do for the said tenement. 
Provided nevertheless that the same Roger de Chaumpayne should 
take the said rent every year by the hand of Roger de Pydele during 
his life and the life of Peter at four terms namely, twenty-three shillings 
and four pence at Easter, Nativity of St. John Baptist, Michaelmas and 
Nativity of Our Lord, thus, after the decease of Roger de Pydele, the 
moiety of the said manor which ought to revert to Peter, if he survived 
Roger de Pydele should wholly remain to Roger de Chaumpayne should 
he then be living. To have and to hold to Roger de Chaumpayne for 
life, of Peter during his life, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the 
Nativity of St. John Baptist, and doing therefor such foreign service as 
belongs to such moiety for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. 
And Peter will warrant the said rent to Roger.de Chaumpayne during 
Roger de Pydele's life, after whose death he will warrant the moiety of 



1 86 Dorset Fines. 



the manor to Roger de Chaumpayne by the said services against all 
men during both the lives of Peter and Roger de Chaumpayne. After 
the deaths of Roger de Chaumpayne and Roger de Pydele the said 
moiety wholly will revert to Peter and the heirs of Beatrice who was 
the wife of Peter quit for ever. This concord was made in the presence 
of Roger de Pydele who acknowledged that he owed the rent for 
the said tenement as is aforesaid, and likewise recognizing that he can 
claim nothing by right in the said tenement except for the term of the 
lives of the said Roger de Pydele and Peter. And likewise he did 
fealty to Roger de Chaumpayne at the Court for the said tenement. 

(23) At Somerton, on the morrow of St. John Baptist, between Adam 
de Holecumb and Idonia his wife, plaintiffs, and Alan Plokenet, tenent, 
by John Kulvert, in his place, of one and a half acre of meadow, one 
virgate of land in Parva Kyngton. Adam and Idonia acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Alan and remitted and quit claimed the 
same for themselves and the heirs of Idonia to Alan and his heirs for 
ever. For this Alan gave to Adam and Idonia forty shillings sterling. 

(24) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Thomas de la Haule, complainant, by William de Heye- 
ton in his place, and Robert son of Pagan, deforciant, of the custody of 
John son and heir of Robert de Ripariis, which Thomas claimed to 
belong to him, because Robert de Ripariis held land of him by knight's 
service. Thomas remitted and quit claimed for himself and his heirs 
to the said Robert son of Pagan and his heirs all the right he had in 
the custody and marriage of the said John and his heirs for ever. For 
this Robert son of Pagan gave to Thomas sixty marcs of silver. This 
concord was made between them saving to Thomas and his heirs the 
custody, when it should fall, of the tenements which Robert de Ripariis 
held of him by knight's service for ever. 

(25) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Robert de Wodeton and Raulina his wife, complainants, 
and Emma de Greleshegh, impedient, of one messuage and six bovates 
of land in Greleshegh. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between 
them. Emma acknowledged the messuage and land to be the right of 
Robert, as by her gift. To have and to hold to Robert and Raulina 
and the heirs of Robert, of Emma and her heirs for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one rose at the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all ser- 
vice, custom and demand, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that 
fee for Emma and her heirs all other services which to that tenement 
belong. And Emma and her heirs will warrant the messuage and land 
to Robert and Raulina and the heirs of Robert by the said services 
against all men for ever. For this Robert and Raulina gave to Emma 
one sore sparrow hawk. 



\ 



S Edward L (1279-80). 187 



(26) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Henry de Haddon, complainant, and Thomas de Haddon 
and Joan his wife, deforciants, of two messuages and two carucates of 
land in Porton and Porstok. Plea of covenant was summoned between 
them. Thomas and Joan acknowledged the tenements to be the right 
of Henry, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Henry and his heirs 
of the chief lords of those fees by the services which to those tenements 
belong for ever. For this Henry gave to Thomas and Joan one sore 
goskawk. 

[Endorsed.] Thereupon Henry de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln by John 
de Cresacr*, put in his claim. 

And Salomon de Roffa, parson of Corf likewise put in his claim. 

[Note.  Salomon de Roffa was one of the itinerant judges, he ap- 
pears also to have been parson of Corf alias rector or owner of the 
tithes.] 

(27) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between John Malerbe, complainant, and Henry de Haddon, de- 
forciant, of customs and services which John exacted of him in respect 
of the free tenement which beheld of John in Caundel Haddon, namely, 
for two and a half hides of land, wherefor John exacted of Henry that 
he should yearly render to him thirteen shillings and four pence, and 
do homage and relief to him, and to the scutage of the King when it 
should happen, as much as belongs to the fourth part of a knight's fee 
for the said tenement, which rent Henry recognizes. John remitted 
and quit claimed for himself and his heirs to Henry and his heirs his 
right and claim to the said yearly rent of thirteen shillings and four 
pence for ever. For this Henry gave to John forty-eight marcs of 
silver and acknowledged and granted for himself and his heirs that 
henceforth they would render every year to John and his heirs at Caun- 
del Haddon one clove gillyflower at Michaelmas and do to John as 
much service for the tenement as belongs to the fourth part of a knight's 
fee, for all service, custom and demand. Be it known that Henry ac- 
knowledged that he had done homage to John for the tenement. 

(28) At Shyrebourn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Swaynus de Fromton and Matilda his wife, complain- 
ants, and Richard Bochard and Avicia his wife, deforciants, of five 
acres and a half of land, one acre and a half of meadow, and four acres 
of wood in Chedyndon. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. 
Richard and Avicia acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Sway- 
nus as by their gift. To have and to hold to Sweynus and Matilda and 
the heirs of Sweynus of Richard and Avicia and the heirs of Avicia for 
ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at Michaelmas, and doing 
therefor as much foreign service as belongs to such tenement for all 



iS8 Dorset Fines. 



service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And Richard and Avicia 
and the heirs of Avicia will warrant to Sweynus and Matilda and the 
heirs of Sweynus, the said tenement by the said services against all 
men for ever. For this Sweynus and Matilda gave to Richard and 
Avicia one sore sparrow hawk. 

[Endorsed,'] Thereupon Robert, Bishop of Salisbury by Henry de 
Esshe, put in his claim. 

(29) At Schyrebourn, fifteen days after the day of St. Hillary, 
between William Haumund, complainant, and Gregory de Kyngeston 
and Felicia his wife, impedients, of nine acres of land in Kyngeston 
Marlevard. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
Gregory and Felicia acknowledged the land to be the right of William, 
as by their gift. To have and to hold to William and his heirs of 
Gregory and Felicia and the heirs of Felicia for ever, rendering therefor 
yearly one penny at Easter, and doing therefor such foreign service as 
belongs to the said land for all service, suit of Court, custom and 
demand. And Gregory and Felicia and the heirs of Felicia will warrant 
to William and his heirs the said land by the said services against all 
men for ever. For this William gave to Gregory and Felicia twenty 
shillings sterling. 

(30) At Somerton, on the morrow of St. John Baptist^ between 
John de Bello Campo, complainant, and Humphrey de Bello Campo 
and Sibilla his wife, impedients, of the manor of Wambrok. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned between them. Humphrey and 
Sibilla acknowledged the manor to be the right of John, as by their 
gift. For this John granted it to them. To have and to hold to 
Humphrey and Sibilla and their heirs, of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which to the said manor belong for ever. Should Sibilla 
die without heir of her body begotten by Humphrey, he surviving, the 
manor wholly shall remain to him and his heirs, quit of the other heirs 
of Sibilla, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the said services for 
ever. Should Humphrey die without heir of Sibilla' s body begotten by 
him, she surviving, then the manor will wholly remain to her and her 
heirs quit of the other heirs of Humphrey, to hold of the chief lords of 
that fee by the said services for ever. 

(31) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between John le Wayte and Amicia his wife, plaintiffs, and 
Richard Kegel, tenent, of eight acres of land in Corf. John and 
Amicia acknowledged the said land to be the right of Richard, and 
remitted and quit claimed the same for themselves and the heirs of 
Amicia to Richard and his heirs for ever. For this Richard gave to 
John and Amicia fifteen shillings sterling. 

[Endorsed.] Salomon de Roffa, parson of Corf, put in his claim. 



8 Edward I. (1279-80). 189 



(32) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between John de Blakemore, complainant, and Richard Bochard 
and Avicia his wife, deforciants, of one messuage, fifteen acres and a 
half of land, and three solidates of rent in Chedyndon. Plea of 
covenant was summoned between them. Richard and Avicia acknow- 
ledged the tenement to be the right of John, as by their gift. To have 
and to hold to John and his heirs of Richard and Avicia and the heirs 
of Avicia for ever ; rendering therefor yearly one pound of cumin at 
Michaelmas, and doing therefor such foreign service as belongs to the 
said tenement, for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. And 
Richard and Avicia and the heirs of Avicia will warrant to John and 
his heirs the said tenement by the said services against all men for 
ever. For this John gave to Richard and Avicia twenty marcs of 
silver. 

[Endorsed,'] Thereupon Robert, Bishop of Salisbury by Henry de 
Esshe, put in his claim. 

(33) At Shyreburn, fifteen days after the day of the Purification of 
the Blessed Mary, between Thomas Abbot of Cerne, complainant, and 
John Skybard and Matilda his wife, deforciants, of one messuage, forty 
acres of land and fifteen acres of meadow in Wotton Flemeng. Plea 
of covenant was summoned between them. John and Matilda acknow- 
ledged the tenement, namely, whatever they before had in the said vill 
without any retainment, to be the right of the Abbot and his church 
of Cerne, and remitted and quit claimed the same for themselves and 
their heirs to the Abbot and his successors and his said church for 
ever. For this the Abbot for himself and his successors and his church 
granted that henceforth John and Matilda may have one suitable 
chaplain daily to celebrate divine service in the conventual church of 
Cerne at the altar of the Holy Cross, for the souls of themselves, their 
ancestors and all deceased faithful! ones for ever. Provided neverthe- 
less that during their lives they, and after their deaths Philip Harang 
brother of the said John,* and the heirs of Philip shall present to the 
Abbot and his successors and his church the said chaplain when it is 
necessary. And the Abbot and his successors and his church shall 
admit such chaplain upon the presentations aforesaid without let or 
hindrance. Moreover the Abbot granted for himself and his successors 
and his church that henceforth they would find and sustain at their own 
costs a decent chamber within the Abbey of Cerne for the chaplain 
near the Abbey door for ever. And that they would find for the 
chaplain one monk's corody, that is to say, one white loaf, and one 
flagon of ale from the conventual cellar, two dishes (fercula) from the 

* John Skybard, and Philip Harang were brothers. 



190 Dorset Fines, 

conventual kitchen every day, a pittance (pitancia) * when it should fall 
the same as the monks have in the refectory, and two stone of good 
cheese, namely, eighteen pounds of cheese every year in the quinzaine 
of Easter from the said cellar, and one cartload of litter f and four cart- 
loads of bush at Michaelmas. Moreover the Abbot and his successors 
and his church will render every year to the chaplain sixteen shillings, 
namely, a moiety at Easter and a moiety at Michaelmas, for his 
stipend for ever. Be it known that the Abbot and his successors will 
find, for the chaplain, all church ornaments for celebration, which 
belong to the said office for ever. 

S^ndorsed,'] And Walter le Flemang put in his claim. 

(34) At Shyrebourn, on the morrow of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Geoffirey de Barenvylle complainant, and Walter de 
Radyng and Isabella his wife, impedients, of one messuage in Shyre- 
bourn. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. Walter and Isabella 
acknowledged the messuage to be the right of Geoffirey, as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to Geoffrey and his heirs of Walter and Isabella 
and the heirs of Isabella for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at 
the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, custom and demand, 
and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for them all other 
services which to that messuage belong. And Walter and Isabella and 
the heirs of Isabella will warrant the messuage to Geoffiey and his 
heirs by the said services against all men for ever. For this Geoffrey 
gave to Walter and Isabella ten marcs of silver. 

\Endorsed?^ Thereupon comes Robert, Bishop of Salisbury by 
Henry de Esse, his bailiff and puts in his claim. 

(35) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Baldewin de H addon, complainant, and Ingeramus de 
Perer and Alice his wife, impedients, of five and a half acres of land, 
and a moiety of one messuage and a fourth part of one mill in Caundel 
Haddon. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned between them. 
Ingeramus and Alice acknowledged the tenement to be the right of 
Baldewin, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Baldewin and his 
heirs of Ingeramus and Alice and the heirs of Alice for ever, doing 
therefor foreign service, and to the King's scutage when it should 
happen, as much as belongs to such tenement of the same fee in the 
same vill, and likewise doing therefor to Ingeramus and Alice and the 
heirs of Alice, for relief of the said tenement when it should befall, 
three pence for all service, suit of Court, custom and demand. Pro- 
vided nevertheless that it shall not be lawfull for Ingeramus and Alice 

* A little repast or refection of fish or flesh. 

t " Litere " of litter, " busce " of bush in fine 179, p. 75, the word looked like bustam 
and was translated brush, this was wron^. 



8 Edward I . (1279-80). 191 

and the heirs of Alice to exact from Baldewin and his heirs, homage, 
fealty, aid, ward, custody or anything else by reason of the said tene- 
ments and services except so much as is aforesaid. And Ingeramus 
and Alice and the heirs of Alice will warrant the tenement to Baldewin 
and his heirs by the aforesaid services against all men for ever. For 
this Baldewin gave to Ingeramus and Alice five marcs of silver. 

(36) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between John de Abyndon and Sarra his wife, complainants, and 
Thomas de Strode, deforciant, of customs and services which John and 
Sarra exact from Thomas for the free tenement he holds of them in Strode, 
namely one messuage and one carucate of land, wherefor they exact 
from him ten shillings and one pound of cumin yearly, and that he 
should do to them homage and relief, and to the scutage of the King when 
it should befall as much as belongs to a fifth part of a knight's fee. 
Whereupon Thomas recognizes the customs and services of ten shil- 
lings a year, homage, relief and to the scutage that belongs to a tenth 
part * of a knight's fee. Recognizance of the great assize was summoned 
between them. John and Sarra acknowledged and granted for them- 
selves and the heirs of Sarra that Thomas may have and hold the said 
tenement, namely, whatever he held of them in the said vill on the day 
this concord was made, to himself and his heirs of John and Sarra and 
the heirs of Sarra for ever, rendering therefor yearly ten shillings at 
four terms, namely, two shillings and sixpence at Easter, the Nativity 
of St. John Baptist, Michaelmas and Nativity of our Lord, and doing 
therefore to the scutage of the King when it should befall as much as 
belongs to a tenth part of a knight's fee for all service, suit of Court, 
custom and demand. And John and Sarra and the heirs of Sarra will 
warrant the tenement to Thomas and his heirs by the said services 
against all men for ever. For this Thomas gave to John and Sarra one 
sore sparrow hawk. And be it known that Thomas did homage at the 
Court to John and Sarra for the said tenement. 

(37) At Shyreburn, on the morrow of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Cristiana who was the wife of Roger Chaunterel, Henry 
de la Haye and Edith his wife, Alina who was the wife of Adam 
Tynham, William Burgeys and Alice his wife, plaintiffs, and Peter 
Doget, chaplain, tenent, of one acre of land in Corf. And between the 
same plaintiffs and the said Peter who John le Meyre vouched to 
warrant and who warranted to him, tenent, of one acre of land in the 
said vill. Cristiana, Henry, Edith, Alina, William and Alice acknow- 
ledged the land to be the right of Peter and remitted and quit claimed 
the same for themselves and the heirs of Cristiana, Edith, Alina and 

* He does not recognise the pound of cumin and scutage of one fifth of a knight's 
fee. 



192 Dorset Fines, 



Alice to Peter and his heirs for ever. For this Peter gave to the 
plaintiffs one hundred shillings sterling. 

(38) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Gilbert de Frome and Elena his wife, plaintiffs, and Alan 
de Plokenet^ tenent, by John Stanyng in his place, of a messuage and 
land in Bub Melebur'. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned. Gilbert 
and Elena acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Alan and 
remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Elena to Alan and 
his heirs, for ever. For this Alan gave to them ten marcs of silver. 

(39) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of the Purification of 
the Blessed Mary, between Lawrencia, Abbess of Shaston, querent, by 
John Gyffard in her place, and Henry de Haddon,deforciant, of one hun- 
dred shillings arrears of a yearly rent of six shillings, which Henry was 
accustomed to render to the Abbess and her church of Shaston in respect 
of a tenement called Hundeslond which he held of the Abbess and her 
church, in Caudel Haddon. Henry acknowledged and granted that 
henceforth he and his heirs would render to the Abbess and her successors 
yearly six shillings for the tenement at Nativity of St. John Baptist and 
Nativity of our Lord. Moreover Henry gave to the Abbess forty shil- 
lings for the said arrears. For this the Abbess remitted the rest of the 
arrears and the damage she sustained by their detention up to the day 
of this concord. 

(40) At Shyreburn, fifteen days after the day of the Purification of 
the Blessed Mary, between Nicholas de la Ry gge and Alice his wife, 
plaintiffs, and Robert son of William de Godmaneston, tenent, of one 
messuage and a moiety of a hide of land in Huffeld. Nicholas and 
Alice acknowledged the same to be the right of Robert and remitted the 
same for themselves and the heirs of Alice to Robert and his heirs, for 
ever. For this Robert gave them one hundred shillings sterling. 

(41) At Shyreburn, fifteen days after the day of the Purification of 
the Blessed Mary, between Robert de Cherelton and Walter de Hyneton, 
plaintiffs, and Thomas Peverel, tenent, by Roger de la Hyde in his 
place, of one virgate of land in Sturmenystr' Mareschal. Robert and 
Walter remitted their right, for themselves and their heirs, to Thomas 
and his heirs, for ever. For this Thomas gave them sixty shillings 
sterling. 

(42) At Shyreburn, fifteen days after the day of the Purification of 
the Blessed Mary, between Master Eustachius de Wrotham, querent, by 
Robert de Kane* in his place, and Humfrey de Bello Campo and 
Sibilla his wife, deforciants, of two parts of the manor of Rym. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Eustachius acknowledged the tenement to 
be the right of Sibilla. For this Humfrey and Sibilla gave the tene- 
ment to him. To have and to hold to Master Eustachius during his life. 



8 Edward I, (1279-80). 193 

of Humfrey and Sibilla and the heirs he should beget by her, or of 
the heirs of either Humfrey or Sibilla whichever should happen to 
live longest, in case Humfrey should not beget heirs by Sibilla. 
Rendering therefor yearly one rose at the Nativity of St. John Baptist, 
for all service, etc. The deforciants and their heirs will warrant the 
tenement to Eustachius during his life. Reversion thereof after his 
decease to Humfrey and Sibilla and their heirs quit of the heirs of 
Eustachius, for ever. That is to say Humfrey and Sibilla shall hold 
the tenement of the chief lords of that fee by the service belonging 
thereto during either of their lives, if they survive Eustachius. After 
their deaths the tenement wholly shall remain to the heirs who Humfrey 
begets by Sibilla, to hold of the chief lords, etc If Humfrey begets no 
heir by Sibilla then, after their deaths, the tenement wholly will remain 
to the nearest heir of either Humfrey or Sibilla who should live the 
longer. 

[Endorsed,] Robert, Bishop of Salisbury, by Henry de Esse, his 
Steward [Senescallum suum] puts in his claim. 

(43) At Shyreburn, fifteen days after the day of the Purification of 
the Blessed Mary, between Adam de la Legh and Edith his wife, William 
de la Doune and Matilda his wife, Peter de Ryseby and Cecilia his wife, 
John Waryn and Alice his wife, plaintifis, and Margery who was wife 
of Richard de Gowyz, tenent, of a messuage and land in Langeton. 
Assize of mort ancestor was summoned. The plaintiffs remitted for 
themselves and the heirs of Edith, Matilda, Cecilia and Alice their right 
in the tenement, to Margery and her heirs, for ever. For this Margery 
gave to the plaintiffs twenty marcs of silver. 

(44) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between William, Prior of Christ's church, querent, by Roger 
Quentyn in his place, and Thomas de Slymbrigg* and Emma his wife, 
deforciants, of a messuage and land in Flete. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. The deforciants acknowledged the tenement to be the right 
of the Prior of Christ's Church of Twynham and remitted the same for 
themselves and the heirs of Emma to the Prior and his successors and 
his church, for ever. For this the Prior gave to Thomas and Emma 
five marcs of silver. 

(45) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mar&gt;', between Robert Rycher, querent, and John de Waye and Joan 
his wife, impedients, of one messuage in Melecumbe. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned. John and Joan acknowledged the messuage to 
be the right of Robert as by their gift. To have and to hold to Robert 
and his heirs, of John and Joan and the heirs of Joan for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, etc., and doing there- 
for to the chief lords of that fee for John and Joan and the heirs of Joan 

13 



194 Dorset Fifies, 



all other services which belong to the messuage. John and Joan and 
the heirs of Joan will warrant the messuage by the said services against 
all men, for ever. For this Robert gave to them one sore sparrow hawk. 

(46) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between William Quentyn, querent, and Gregory de Kyngeston' 
and Felicia his wife, impedients, of a messuage and land in Kyngeston' 
Marlebard. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. The impedients 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of William as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to him and his heirs of Gregory and Felicia and 
the heirs of Felicia for ever. Rendering therefor yearly two pence at 
Easter for all service, etc. Gregory and Felicia and the heirs of Felicia 
will warrant the tenement to William and his heirs by the said service 
against all men, for ever. For this William gave to them twenty marcs 
of silver. 

(47) At Shyreburn, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Geoffrey Chastel, querent, and Richard le Bere, impedient, 
by Walter de Radyng in his place, of two messuages and land in Shyre- 
burn. Pleaofwarranty of deed was summoned. Richard acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Geoffrey as by his gift. For this Geoffrey 
granted the same to Richard. To have and to hold to Richard for his 
life, of Geoffrey and his heirs. Rendering therefor yearly one penny at 
Michaelmas for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of 
that fee for Geoffrey and his heirs all other services which belong to 
that tenement. After the decease of Richard the tenement wholly shall 
revert to Geoffrey and his heirs quit of the heirs of Richard. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that tene- 
ment, for ever. 

[Endorsed^] Robert, Bishop of Salisbury, by Henry de Esse, puts 
in his claim. 

(48) At Shyreburn, in the morrow of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Peter de Chavyll, querent, and John le Meyre, junior, 
and Juliana his wife, and John Gocelyn and Matilda his wife, impedi- 
ments, of a messuage and land in Wolgareston. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned. The impedients acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of Peter as by their gift. To have and to hold to Peter 
and his heirs of John le Meyre and Juliana, John Gocelyn and Matilda 
and the heirs of Juliana and Matilda for ever. Rendering therefor yearly 
to John and Juliana one rose at the Nativity of St. John Baptist and to 
John and Matilda one rose at the same feast for all service, etc, and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for the said impedients all 
other services which belong to that tenement. The impedients will 
warrant the tenement to Peter by the said services against all men for 
ever. For this Peter gave to them sixteen marcs of silver. 



8 Edward I. (1279-80). 195 

(49) At Somerton, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Walter 
de Aclee and Mabilia his wife, William Belet and Avicia his wife, Roger 
de Watercumbe and Joan his wife, Peter Bysemare and Matilda his 
wife, Ralph de Eston and Amicia his wife, Constancia de Gaulton, Hugh 
Russell, John Fulke and William atte Berne, plaintiffs, and Robert de 
Boys, who Roger de Boys and Margery his wife called to warrant and 
who warranted to them one carucate of land and two parts of a mes- 
suage in Childefrome. And between the said plaintiffs and the said 
Robert de Boys, who William de Pauleshath and Matilda his wife called 
to warrant and who warranted to them two messuages and thirty-six acres 
of land in the same vill. And between the said plaintiffs and the said 
Robert de Boys, who Robert de Muster and Matilda his wife called to 
warrant and who warranted to them a messuage of ten acres of land in 
the same vill. And between the said plaintiffs, and the said Robert 
de Boys, who Arnulph le Mouner and Agnes his wife called to warrant 
and who warranted to them a messuage and two acres of land in the same 
vill. And between the said plaintiffs, and the said Robert de Boys, 
who William Marleward called to warrant and who warranted to them 
two acres of land in the same vill. The plaintiffs acknowledged the tene- 
ments to be the right of Robert de Boys and remitted the same for 
themselves and the heirs of the said Mabilia, Avicia, Joan, Matilda wife 
of Peter, and Amicia to Robert and his heirs for ever. For this Robert 
de Boys gave to the plaintiffs fifty pounds sterling. This concord was 
made between them saving to Robert de Boys and his heirs, Roger de 
Boys and Margery and the heirs they should beget, all articles contained 
in a certain fine made at Westminster between Roger de Boys and 
Margery, querents, and the said Robert de Boys, deforciant, of the afore- 
said tenements, for ever. 

(50) At Shyreburn, fifteen days after the day of the Purification of 
the Blessed Mary, between John Baryl, querent, and Walter Heym and 
Alice his wife, impedients, of a rent of eight shillings and three pence in 
Shaftisbyr*. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. The impedients 
acknowledged the rent to be the right of John Baryl as by their gift 
To have and to hold to John and his heirs of Walter and Alice and the 
heirs of Alice for ever. Rendering therefor yearly one rose at the Nativity 
of St. John the Baptist for all service, etc. The impedients will warrant 
the rent to John and his heirs by the said service against all men for ever. 
Should it happen that the tenements of Alice were not sufficient to make 
the said warranty, Walter granted for himself and his heirs that he and all 
others who henceforth shall hold the same tenements which he held in 
Henle on the day this concord was made shall warrant the said rent to 
John and his heirs whensoever it should be necessary, against all men 
for ever. For this John gave to Walter and Alice ten marcs of silver. 



196 Dorset Fines. 



(51) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of the Purification of 
the Blessed Mary, between William de Wyndesor, plaintiff, by William 
Sancovenaunt in his place, and John de Camoys and Margareta his 
wife, tenents, by Andrew de Yuhurste in their place, of two parts of a 
carucate of land in Cumpton, except the advowson of the church. 
William acknowledged the same to be the right of Margareta and re- 
mitted the same for himself and his heirs to John and Margareta and 
the heirs of Margareta, for ever. For this they gave to William sixty 
marcs of silver. 

(52) At Shyreburn, three weeks after the day of the Purification of 
the Blessed Mary, between Sibilla de Watercome, Margeria and Edith 
her daughters, querents, and Stephen de Watercome, deforciant, of a 
messuage and one carucate of land in Watercome. Plea of covenant was 
summoned between them. Sibilla acknowledged the tenement to be 
the right of Stephen. For this Stephen granted it to Sibilla. To have 
and to hold to Sibilla for life, of Stephen during his life. Rendering 
therefor yearly sixty shillings at Easter and Michaelmas, and doing there- 
for to the chief lords of that fee for Stephen, all other services which be- 
long to the said tenement. After Stephen's death Sibilla shall be quit 
of the said payment, and hold the tenement of the heirs of Stephen, 
rendering therefor yearly one rose at the Nativity of St. John Baptist 
for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for 
the said heirs all other services. After Sibilla' s death one moiety of 
the tenement lying towards the east (versus solem) shall remain to 
Margery and the heirs of her body. To hold of Stephen, if he is living, 
rendering therefor yearly thirty shillings at the two said terms, and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee all other services which belong to 
the said moiety. The other moiety lying towards the west (versus um- 
bram) shall remain to Edith and the heirs of her body. To hold of the 
said Stephen, rendering therefore yearly thirty shillings at the said two 
terms, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee all other services 
which belong to the said moiety. After Stephen's death Margery and Edith 
shall be quit of the said payments, and hold the moieties to themselves 
and the heirs of their bodies of Stephen's heirs for ever. Rendering 
therefor yearly two roses at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, 
etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for the said heirs all 
other services as is aforesaid. If either Margery or Edith survived the 
other without heir of her body begotten, the other having died without 
heir of her body begotten, the whole tenement after Sibilla's death 
would then remain to such survivor and the heir of his body. To hold, 
etc. (In same way as above.) Stephen and his heirs will warrant the 
tenement to Sibilla by the said services against all men during her life, 
and in like manner to Margery and Edith and their heirs after Sibilla's 



9 Edward L (1280-81). 197 

death. Should both Margery and Edith die without heirs of their 
bodies the tenement after Sibilla's death wholly shall revert to Stephen 
and his heirs quit of other heirs of Margery and Edith. To hold of the 
chief lords of those fees by services which belong to the tenement, for 
ever. 

9 Edward I. (1280-81). 

(53) At Wilton, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, be- 
tween Robert Hugun and Sarra his wife and Matilda her sister, plaintiffs, 
and Thomas de Corf, tenent, of a messuage and land in Esse. The 
plaintiffs acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Thomas and re- 
mitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Sarra and Matilda to 
Thomas and his heirs, for ever. For this Thomas gave to the plain- 
tiffs forty shillings sterling. 

(54) At Wynton, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Henry de Pydele, querent, and Philip de Baggelake and 
Cristiana his wife, impedients, of a messuage and a moiety of i virgate 
of land in Westwadden. The impedients acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of Henry and remitted the same for themselves and the 
heirs of Cristiana to Henry and Joan and the heirs of Henry for ever. 
For this Henry granted to Philip and Cristiana i messuage, 10 acres 
of land and i acre of meadow in the same vill. To have and to hold 
to Philip and Cristiana for the life of either, of Henry and his heirs, 
rendering therefor yearly one penny at Michaelmas, and doing therefor 
the foreign service belonging thereto. Henry and his heirs will warrant 
to Philip and Cristiana the tenement that remains to them by this fine 
by the said services against all men during the life of both Philip and 
Cristiana. After the death of both the tenement which remains to 
them by this fine shall revert to Henry and his heirs quit of the heirs 
of Philip or Cristiana for ever. Moreover Henry and Joan gave to 
Philip and Cristiana forty shillings of silver. 

(55) At Wylton, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between John atte 
Chyrche of Horton, querent, and Reginald atte Chirche of Horton, im- 
pedient, of a messuage and land in Horton. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned. Reginald acknowledged the tenement to be the right 
of John as by his gift. For this John granted the tenement to Regi- 
nald. To have and to hold to Reginald for life, of John and his heirs, 
rendering therefor yearly eight shillings at Michaelmas and Easter for 
all service, etc. John and his heirs will warrant the tenement to Regi- 
nald for his life, by the said service against all men. After his death 
the tenement wholly shall revert to John and his heirs quit of the heirs 
of Reginald. ' To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenement for ever. 



198 Dorset Fines. 



(56) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between Thomas 
Peverel and Alesia his wife, querents, by John de Cumbe in their place, 
and Thomas de Leukenore, deforciant, of the manor of Berhorsindene. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. The deforciant acknowledged the 
manor to be the right of Thomas Peverel as that which he and Alesia 
had by his gift. To have and to hold to Thomas and Alesia and the 
heirs of Thomas of the deforciant and his heirs for ever, rendering there- 
for yearly one penny at Michaelmas for all service, etc., and doing there- 
for to the chief lords of that fee for the deforciant and his heirs all ser- 
vices which belong to the manor. The deforciant and his heirs will 
warrant the manor to Thomas Peverel and Alesia and the heirs of 
Thomas Peverel by the said services against all men, for ever. For 
this Thomas Peveral and Alesia gave to the deforciant five hundred and 
fifty marcs of silver. 

[Endorsed,] Agnes daughter of Henry Lobet put in her claim. 

(57) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between the 
King and Alienora his consort, Queen of England, querents, and Elyas 
de Rabayn and Matilda his wife, deforciants, of the manor of Netherlym. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. The deforciants acknowledged the 
manor to be the right of the King and Queen and remitted the same 
for themselves and the heirs of Matilda to the King and Queen and 
their heirs, for ever. For this the King and Queen gave to Elyas and 
Matilda one sore goshawk. 

(58) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between Henry 
de Clerebek', querent, and John de Clerebek, deforciant, of a messuage 
and land and five marks of rent in Childhokeford, which tenement 
Amicia Countess of Devon holds for term of life, of the said John, of 
his inheritance, and which after the decease of the Countess ought to 
revert to him and his heirs. Plea of covenant was summoned. John 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Henry as by his gift, after 
the decease of the Countess. To have and to hold to Henry and his 
heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that 
tenement, for ever. John granted for himself and his heirs that then 
they would warrant the tenement to Henry and his heirs against all 
men, for ever. For this Henry gave to John forty pounds sterling. 
This concord was made, there being present the Countess who acknow- 
ledged she had no right in the said tenement except for term of her 
life. 

(59) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, 
between Hugh de Hert, querent, and William de Lyschet Monaster', 
impedient, of a messuage in Wymburn Monaster'. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned. William acknowledged the messuage to be the 
right of Hugh, as by his gift. To have and to hold to Hugh and his 



II Edward L (1282-83). ^99 

heirs of William and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one 
clove gillyflower at the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, etc., 
and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for WiUiam and his heirs 
all other services which belong thereto. William and his heirs will 
warrant the messuage to Hugh and his heirs by the said services against 
all men, for ever. For this Hugh gave to William six marcs of silver. 

(60) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between John 
Mautravers, querent, by John Godwyne in his place, and Roger 
Waspayl, impedient, by William le Warener in his place, of the manors 
of Langeton and Wychampton. Roger acknowledged the manors to be 
the right of John as by his gift. To have and to hold to John and his 
heirs of the chief lords of those fees by the services which belong thereto, 
for ever. For this John gave to Roger 100 marcs of silver. 

II Edward I. (1282-83). 

(61) At Salop*, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, between 
Brian de Gowiz, junior, querent, and Brian de Gowyz, senior, deforciant, 
by Richard de Loveny in his place, of five carucates of land in Dirrewy- 
neston, Knytheton and Tacton. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Brian senior acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Brian junior 
as by his gift. To have and to hold to Brian junior and the heirs of his 
body of Brian senior and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one 
penny at Easter for all service, etc., and likewise rendering therefor 
yearly to Brian senior during life twenty pounds sterling at Easter, 
Nativity of St. John, Michaelmas, and Nativity of our Lord, and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of those fees for Brian senior and his heirs all 
other services which belong to the tenements. If Brian junior died 
without heir of his body and his brother John survived him the tenements 
wholly shall remain to the said John and the heirs of his body to hold as 
abovesaid. If John died without heir of his body and his brother Henry 
survived him the tenements wholly shall remain to the said Henry and 
the heirs of his body to hold as abovesaid. If Henry died without heir 
of his body and his brother Nicholas survived him, the tenements wholly 
shall remain to the said Nicholas and the heirs of his body, to hold as 
abovesaid. If Nicholas died without heir of his body and his brother 
Roger survived him, the tenements wholly shall remain to the said 
Roger and the heirs of his body, to hold as abovesaid. If Roger died 
without heirs of his body and his sister Sibilla survived him, the tene- 
ments wholly shall remain to the said Sibilla and the heirs of her body, 
to hold as abovesaid. If Sibilla died without heir of her body then the 
tenements wholly shall revert to the said Brian senior and his heirs. 
To hold of the chief lords of those fees by the services which to those 
tenements belong for ever. Brian senior and his heirs will warrant the 



200 Dorset Fines, 



tenements to Brian junior, John, Henry, Nicholas, Roger and Sibilla 
and their heirs aforesaid by the said services against all men for ever. 
After Brian senior's death Brian junior and the others shall be quit of 
the payment of the 20 for ever. For this Brian junior and the others 
gave to Brian senior one sore goshawk. 

[Endorsed.] Henry de Govyz and John his brother put in their claim. 

(62) At Salop, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, between John 
de Gowyz, querent, and Brian de Gowyz, deforciant, by Richard de 
Loveny in his place, of one carucate of land in Hamme Preston. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. Brian acknowledged the land, except the 
meadow of la Breche which he gave to Henry de Gowyz, to be the right 
of John as by his gift. To have and to hold to John and the heirs of 
his body of Brian and his heirs for ever. Rendering therefor one penny 
at Easter for all service, etc., and likewise rendering therefor to Brian 
during his life 100 shillings sterling at terms of Easter, Nativity of St. 
John, Michaelmas, and Nativity of our Lord, and doing therefor to the 
chief lords of that fee for Brian and his heirs all other services belonging 
to that land. Should John die without heirs of his body and his 
brother Brian survived him, then the land wholly shall remain to Brian 
and the heirs of his body to hold of Brian (the deforciant) and his heirs 
by the aforesaid services for ever. Should Brian die without heirs ot 
his body and Henry his brother survived him, then the land wholly, 
etc., etc. [note, the same remainder as in previous fine, namely to Henry, 
Nicholas, Roger, Sibilla]. For this, John, Brian, Henry, Nicholas, 
Roger and Sibilla gave to Brian one sore sparrow hawk. 

[Endorsed.] And Henry de Govyz put in his claim. 

[Note.  These two fines (61 and 62) both made on the same day 
are no doubt a settlement of certain property by Brian de Gowyz on 
his eldest child with remainder to the other children, and a settlement 
on the second child of certain other property with remainder to the other 
children.] 

(63) At Salop, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between John de 
Monte alto, junior, querent, and Peter de Monte alto, deforciant, of two 
parts of the manor of Bradeford juxta Wymburne Menstre, which Robert 
de Croft and Joan his wife hold of Peter and his heirs for term of their 
lives. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknowledged the two 
parts to be the right of Peter. For this Peter granted, for himself and 
his heirs that if John survived Robert and Joan, then the two parts shall 
remain to John. To hold of Peter and his heirs during [John's] life. 
Rendering therefor yearly one barbed arrow at the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist for all service, etc. And then Peter and his heirs will warrant 
the two parts to John during his life against all men. After whose 
decease they shall wholly revert to Peter and his heirs quit of the heirs 



12 Edward I . (1283-84). 201 

of John. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong thereto. This concord was made there being present Robert and 
Joan who acknowledged they had no right in the said two parts except 
for term of their lives, and who granted to John a third part of the 
manor, which third part they held in fee of the purchased possessions * 
of Joan on the day this concord was made. To have and to hold to 
John and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which to 
that third part belong, for ever. 

[Endorsed.] Peter de Monte Alto put in his claim. 

(64) At Salop, in the morrow of St. John Baptist, between Claricia 
de la Lynde, querent, by Reginald Atte Hachche in her place, and 
Geoffrey de la Lynde, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Hercleye. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Claricia acknowledged the tene- 
ment to be the right of Geoffrey as by her gift. For this Geoffrey 
granted the tenement to her. To have and to hold to Claricia for life, 
of Geoffrey and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity 
of St. John Baptist for all service, etc. After his death the tenement 
wholly shall revert to Geoffrey and his heirs quit. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong thereto. 

[Endorsed,] Walter de la Linde put in his claim. 

12 Edward I. (1283-84). 

(65) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Walter 
de Gillingham and Emma his wife, querents, and Roger de la Despense 
and Joan his wife, impedients, of a messuage and land in Wodekeswrth. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. Roger and Joan acknow- 
ledged the tenement to be the right of Walter as that which he and 
Emma had by their gift. To have and to hold to Walter and Emma 
and the heirs of Walter of Roger and Joan and the heirs of Joan for 
ever. Rendering therefor yearly one rose at the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist for all service, etc. Roger and Joan and the heirs of Joan will 
warrant the same to Walter and Emma and the heirs of Walter by the 
said service against all men for ever. For this they gave to Roger and 
Joan one sore sparrow hawk. 

(66) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between Mili- 
centa de Monte Alto, querent, and Gilibert de Frome and Elena his wife 
and Edith her sister, impedients, of land in Bubbe Melebur*. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned. The impedients acknowledged the 
land to be the right of Milisenta and remitted the same for themselves 
and the heirs of Elena and Edith to Milicenta and her heirs for ever. 
Moreover they remitted (in the same way) their right in the rest of the 

* " De perquisitis " as contra-distinguished from inherited possessions. 



202 Dorset Fines. 



manor of Bubbe Melebur' and the advowson of the church, for ever.. 
For this Milicenta gave to them one sore sparrow hawk. 

(67) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between Martin^ 
de Sireburne, querent, and Reginald Husey and Alianora his wife, im- 
pedients, of a messuage and land in Caudelmareis. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned. The impedients acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of Martin as by their gift. To have and to hold to 
Martin and his heirs of them and the heirs of Alianora for ever, render- 
ing therefor yearly to them and the heirs of Alianora one clove gilly- 
flower at the Nativity of our Lord for all service, etc., and doing there- 
for to the chief lords of that fee for Reginald and Alianora and the heirs, 
of Alianora all other services which belong to that tenement. And they 
will warrant the same to Martin and his heirs by the said services 
against all men, for ever. For this Martin gave to Reginald and Alia- 
nora one sore sparrow hawk. 



13 Edward I. (1284-85). 

(68) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Williams 
de Heddesore, querent, and Foucaldus de Arthiaco and Mabilia his wife,, 
impedients, of the manor of Wolneton juxta Chermunstre. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned. William acknowledged the manor 
to be the right of Mabilia. For this Focaldus and Mabilia granted it to 
William. To have and to hold to William for life, of them and the 
heirs of Mabilia, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. 
John Baptist for all service, and they will warrant the manor to William 
for life, by the said service against all men, after whose decease it shall 
wholly revert to Fucaldus and Mabilia and the heirs of Mabilia quit of the 
heirs of William. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the manor. 

(69) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John de Pontissera, querent, by John de Hetfeud in his place, and the 
Prior of Christ's church of Twynham, deforciant, by Richard de Bukes- 
gate in his place, of land in Estington, Kaldecote, Cuaneswelle, Wal- 
gareston and Langeton. Plea of covenant was summoned. John ac- 
knowledged the land to be the right of the Prior and his church. For 
this the Prior granted it to John. To have and to hold to John for life, 
of the Prior and his successors, rendering therefor yearly six pence at 
Michaelmas for all service, etc. Afterjohn's death the land shall wholly 
remain to Joan, mother of John. To hold for her life, of the Prior and 
his successors by the said service, who will warrant the land by the 
said service against all men during the lives of both John or Joan. 
After their deaths the land wholly shall revert to the Prior and his sue- 



14 Edward I, (1285-86). 203 

cessors quit of the heirs of John and Joan. To hold of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to that land for ever. 

(70) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between William 
de Caleshale and Philippa his wife, plaintiffs, and Brother Odo, Prior 
of the Hospital of St. Giles of the Lepers of Ponte Audomari, tenent of 
the advowson of the church of Stormenistre Marchal. William and 
Phillipa acknowledged the advowson of the church to be the right of 
the Prior, except the advowson of the vicarage of Stormenstre Marchal 
and the chapels of Lychet ministre, Hamme juxta la Pole and Cor- 
molin, and remitted the advowson of the church for themselves and the 
heirs of Philippa to the said Prior and Brothers and their successors 
and the hospital aforesaid for ever. The Priors and Brothers received 
William and Philippa into all orisons and benefits which henceforth 
they should do in the said Hospital of St. Giles, for ever. 

(71) At Westminster, in the Octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Roger de Champania and Isabella his wife, querents, and Geoffrey 
Scoy and Mabilia his wife, deforciants, of a messuage and land in 
Stormenstre. Plea of covenant was summoned. Geoffrey and Mabilia 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Roger, as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to Roger and Isabella and the heirs of Roger of 
Geoffrey and Mabilia and the heirs of Mabilia for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one rose at the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all 
service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Geoffrey 
and Mabilia and the heirs of Mabilia all other services which belong to 
that tenement. Geoffrey and Mabilia and the heirs of Mabilia will 
warrant the tenement to Roger. and Isabella by the said services against 
all men for ever. For this Roger and Isabella gave them one sore 
sparrow hawk. 

14 Edward I. (1285-86). 

(72) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Walter 
Mautravers, querent, and Adam le Rymur and Felicia his wife, defor- 
ciants, of a messuage and land in Hocfordeskelling. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Adam and Felicia acknowledged the tenement to be 
the right of Walter, and remitted it for themselves and heirs of Felicia 
to Walter and his heirs. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the tenement, for ever. Adam and Felicia 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Felicia that they would warrant 
the tenement against all men for ever to Walter and his heirs. 

(73) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
William le Bret, querent, and John Pilkot of Craneburne and Alice his 
wife, impedients, of 6 messuages in Craneburne. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned. John and Alice acknowledged the tenement to 



204 Dorset Fines, 



be the right of William, and remitted the same for themselves and the 
heirs of Alice to William and his heirs for ever. For this William gave 
to John and Alice one sore sparrow hawk. 

(74) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between Herbert de Sancto Quintino, querent, by Mathew de Hamme 
in his place, and John Mautravers, senior, impedient, by John Godwyne 
in his place, of land in Wollecumbe. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned. John Mautravers acknowledged the land to be the right of 
Herbert, as by his gift. To have and to hold to Herbert and his heirs 
of John and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one clove gilly- 
flower at Easter for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords 
of that fee for John and his heirs all other services which belong to 
that land. John and his heirs will warrant the land to Herbert and his 
heirs by the said services against all men, for ever. For this Herbert 
gave to John one sore sparrow hawk. 

15 Edward I. (1286-87). 

(75) At Westminster, in the octaves of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Richard de Wymburn, querent, and William 
le Fulur, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Leye. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. William acknowledged the tenement to be the right 
of Richard and rendered it to him. To have and to hold to Richard and 
his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
the tenement for ever. For this Richard granted for himself and his 
heirs that henceforth they would render eight marcs of silver every year 
to William during his life at the terms of Easter, Nativity of St. John, 
Michaelmas and Nativity of our Lord. Should Richard make default 
at any term in the payment thereof, it shall be lawful for William to 
distrain Richard by all his chattels found in the said tenement, and 
retain them until payment of the money in arrear at that term. After 
the death of William, Richard and his heirs shall be quit of the pa3^m6nt 
of the eight marcs yearly for ever. 

(76) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Fulco le 
Barbur and Margery his wife, Gerard le Barbur and Agnes his wife, 
plaintiffs, and William son of Henry de Molendino, tenent, of two parts 
of a messuage and sixty acres of land in Baltingeton. Fulco and 
Margery, Gerard and Agnes acknowledged the tenement to be the right 
of William and remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of 
Margery and Agnes to William and his heirs, for ever. For this 
William gave to Fulco, Margery, Gerard and Agnes eighteen marcs of 
silver. 

(77) At Westminster, in the morrow of Souls (day), between Walter 
Strecche and Edith his wife, querents, and Mathew de Sancto Vigore 



1 6 Edward L (1287-88). 205 

and Sarra his wife, impedients, of nine shillings and sixpence of rent and 
a fourth part of two hides of land in Wyteclyve juxta Swaneswych in 
Purbik. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. Mathew and Sarra 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Walter as that which 
Walter and Edith had by their gift. To have and to hold to Walter 
and Edith and the heirs of Walter of Mathew and Sarra and the heirs 
of Sarra for ever, rendering therefor yearly to Mathew and Sarra during 
the lives of both, six marcs at the terms of Nativity of our Lord, Easter, 
Nativity of St. John Baptist and Michaelmas. After their deaths, 
Walter and Edith and the heirs of Walter shall be quit of the payment 
of the six marcs yearly, for ever. And they shall render every year to 
the heirs of Sarra one clove gillyflower at Easter for all service, etc. ; 
and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Mathew and Sarra 
and the heirs of Sarra all other services which belong to the tenement. 
Mathew and Sarra and the heirs of Sarra will warrant the tenement to 
Walter and Edith and the heirs of Walter by the said services against 
all men, for ever. For this Walter and Edith gave to Mathew and 
Sarra one sore sparrow hawk. 

(78) At Westminster, in the morrow of Souls (day), between John 
de Demeford, querent, and William de Clavile de la Quarere, deforciant, 
of a hide of land in Wrthe in Porbik. Plea of covenant was summoned 
between them. William acknowledged the land to be the right of John. 
For this John granted the land to William. To have and to hold to 
William for his life, of John and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly two 
marcs at Nativity of our Lord, Easter, Nativity of St. John Baptist and 
Michaelmas, for all service, etc John and his heirs will warrant the 
land to William for his life by the said services against all men, after 
whose decease it shall wholly . revert to John and his heirs quit of the 
heirs of William. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to that land. 

16 Edward L (1287-88). 

(79) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hillary, between Hugh 
Poynz, plaintiff, and Milsenta who was the wife of Eudo la Zuche, 
tenent, of a messuage and land in Stokes St. Edwald and the advowson 
of the Chapel. Hugh acknowledged the tenement and advowson to be 
the right of Milsenta and remitted it for himself and his heirs to Milsenta 
and her heirs for ever. For this Milsenta at the instance of Hugh 
granted the tenement and advowson to Nicholas Poynz and Elizabeth 
his wife. To have and to hold to them and the heirs Nicholas should 
beget by Elizabeth, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
to the tenement and advowson belong for ever. Should they die and in 
default of such heirs, the tenements and advowson wholly will remain 



2o6 Dorset Fines, 



to the right heirs of Nicholas. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to the tenement and advowson for ever. 
Moreover Milsenta granted for herself and her heirs that they would 
warrant the tenement and advowson to Nicholas and Elizabeth and the 
heirs of the body of Elizabeth against all men for ever. 

(80) At Westminster, seven weeks after Michaelmas day, between 
Master William de la Wyle, querent, and Roger de Boys, deforciant, of 
a messuage and land in Childefrome and advowson of the church. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. William acknowledged the tenement and 
advowson to be the right of Roger. For this Roger granted them to 
William. To have and to hold to William for his life, of Roger and his 
heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St John Baptist 
for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for 
Roger and his heirs all other services which belong to the tenement and 
advowson. Roger and his heirs will warrant them by the said services 
against all men to William for his life, after whose death they shall 
wholly revert to Roger and his heirs quit of the heirs of William. To 
hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
tenement and advowson, for ever. 

(81) At Shireburn, one month after the day of Holy Trinity, between 
Lucia and Sibilla, daughters of Adam de Corfton, querents, and Adam 
de Corfton and Mathia his wife, impedients, of a messuage, thirty- 
nine acres of land and one acre of meadow in Littlebridie. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned. Adam and Mathia acknowledged 
the tenement as by their gift to be the right of the querents, that is to 
say Sibilla to hold to herself and the heirs of her body, during the lives 
of the impedients, that moiety of the messuage which lies towards the 
east near William Leulin's messuage, and that moiety of the land and 
meadow which lies in the following places, to wit : one acre in " Vox- 
cumbe " near Ralph le Fevere's land on the south, one acre at '* Alba 
Fossata '* near William Dordenel's land on the east, half an acre in 
" Glidecumbe " near the Abbot of Serne's land on the west, three perches 
in the tillage called "le Sttrop" near Elyas Nichole's land on the south, 
half an acre in ** Bydecumbe " near the said Abbot's land on the south, 
three perches in ** Alecumbe " near the said Abbot's land on the east, 
three perches in " Vest Alecumbe " near Ralph le Strange's land on the 
north, one acre in the tillage called " Boueprest Weye " near Ralph le 
Fevere's land on the east, half an acre in the common meadow of the 
said vill on the west, half an acre at " Porta de Pedecumbe " near the 
aforesaid common meadow on the west, one acre in ** Pedecumbe " near 
Ralph le Strange's land on the west, one acre in " Le Breche " near 
Walter Leulin's land on the south, one acre in the tillage called ' Le 
Shouelede lond " near Isabel Rasters land on the west, one acre in 



i6 Edward L (1287-88). 207 

** Surfurlong " near Roger Colesweyn's land on the east, three perches 
in "Lincumbe" near the aforesaid Abbot's land, half an acre on the 
east side of the road called " Ponstonesweye," three perches in " Furs- 
lade '* near John But's land on the east, one acre near ** Les Hoges " on 
the east, half an acre in ** Smalecumbe ** near John le Keu's land on 
the south, three perches at * Wyndesburwe *' near Martin Rastel's land 
on the east, half an acre above ** Voxdon *' near the land of the parson 
of the said vill on the east, one acre and one rood above ** Le Penne" 
near William Gabriel's land on the north, half an acre to the north of 
**' Alba via," half an acre near William Dordenel's meadow on the south. 
Rendering therefor yearly one marc of silver, half at Michaelmas and 
half at Easter, for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords 
of that fee for Adam and Mathia all other services which belong to the 
-said moiety. Lucia shall have and hold to her herself and the heirs 
of her body the other moiety of the said tenement without any retain- 
ment during the lives of the impedients, rendering therefor yearly one 
marc of silver, for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords 
of that fee for Adam and Mathia all other services which belong to the 
aid moiety. The impedients during their lives will warrant the tene- 
ment to Lucia and Sibilla and their heirs by the said services against all 
men. After their deaths, Lucia and Sibilla shall be quit of the payment 
of the money yearly and shall hold the tenement of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to it for ever. Should Lucia and Sibilla 
die without heirs of their bodies, or should the heirs of their bodies die 
-without heirs of themselves then the tenement shall wholly remain to 
Alice sister of Lucia and Sibilla and her heirs. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the said services for ever. Should either Lucia or 
Sibilla die without heir of her body, the other surviving, then the whole 
of the deceased's part shall remain to Alice and her heirs. To hold as 
is aforesaid for ever. For this Lucia and Sibilla gave to Adam and 
Mathia one sore sparrowhawk. 

\Endorsed^ John de Sarum puts in his claim. 

(82) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Thomas 
le Mareschal and Cristiana his wife, plaintiffs, and Gunnilda daughter 
of Richard Le Bere, tenent, of a messuage in Shireburn. Thomas and 
Cristiana acknowledged the messuage to be the right of Gunnilda and 
remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Cristiana to Gunnilda 
and her heirs, for ever. For this Gunnilda gave to them four marcs of 
silver. 

(83) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between John 
&lt;ie Monte Alto, querent, and William Marscot, impedient, of a messuage, 
six virgates of land and sixty shillings of rent in Magna Cranford. 
William acknowledged the tenement to be the right of John, as that 



2o8 Dorset Fines, 



which he had by gift of Joan de Monte Alto, mother of John, and by 
grant of William. To have and to hold to John and his heirs of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, 
for ever. For this acknowledgment and grant John gave to William 
ten pounds sterling. 

(84) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Robert 
de Wodeton and Raulina his wife, querents, and Alexander de Brade- 
feud and Agnes his wife, impedients of land in Halghestoke. The 
impedients acknowledged the land to be the right of. Robert, as that 
which he and Raulina had by their gift. To have and to hold to Robert 
and Raulina and the heirs of Robert of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the said land, for ever. For this Robert and 
Raulina gave to Alexander and Agnes one sore sparrow hawk. 

(85) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Beatrice, 
Abbess of Holy Trinity de Cadamo, plaintiff, by John de Feldstede in 
her place, and Thomas, Abbot of Teukesbury, tenent, of the advowson 
of the chapel of Tarente Lowyneston. The Abbess acknowledged the 
advowson to be the right of the Abbot and his church of the Blessed 
Mary of Teukesbury and remitted the same for herself and her successors 
and her church to the Abbot and his successors and his church, for 
ever. For this the Abbot gave to the Abbess one sore sparrow hawk. 
Be it known that the Judges allowed this fine between the above said 
parties to pass because by inquisition previously made before them 
in the same Court it was found that the Abbot and his predecessors for 
twenty years before this fine was made had been in seisin of the said 
advowson. 

(86) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Maria, 
daughter of Robert son of Robert de la Chaumbre, John Berefote and 
Matilda his wife and Joan sister of Matilda, plaintiffs, and Richard Joye,. 
tenent, of a messuage, twenty acres of meadow and a moiety of one 
carucate of land, except twenty-four acres of land, in Westport juxta 
Warham. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned. The plaintiffs ac- 
knowledged the tenement, except the twenty-four acres aforesaid, to be 
the right of Richard and remitted the same for themselves and the heirs 
of Maria, Matilda and Joan to Richard and his heirs for ever. For this 
he granted to the plaintiffs three acres of the said land in Westport and 
two messuages and one acre of meadow in Warham to wit : those three 
acres in the tillage called ** le Bye " near the high way, between Richard 
Beste's and Edward CaynePs land, and those two messuages and mea&gt; 
dow which the said Richard (Joye) before had by the gift of Gerard 
Brode in Warham. To have and to hold to Maria, John, Matilda and 
Joan and the heirs of Maria, Matilda and Joan of Richard and his heirs 
for ever. Rendering therefor yearly a rose at the Nativity of St. John 



i6 Edward L (1287-88). 209 

Baptist for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of those 
fees for Richard and his heirs all other services which belong to those 
tenements. Richard and his heirs will warrant the land, messuages and 
meadow to the plaintiffs and the heirs of Maria, Matilda and Joan as is 
aforesaid by the said services against all men, for ever. 

(87) At Shireburn, one month after the day of Holy Trinity, between 
John de Paris and Alice his wife, querents, and Richard de la Yea and 
Christina his wife, deforciants, of a messuage and one ferling of land 
and eleven pounds' worth (libratis) and two pennyworth (denaratis) of 
rent in Oskereswell. Plea of covenant was summoned. The defor- 
ciants acknowledged the tenement* to be the right of John. To have 
and to hold to John and Alice and the heirs of John, of Richard and 
Cristina and the heirs of Cristina for ever, rendering therefor yearly 
a rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Richard and Cristina and the 
heirs of Cristina all other services which belong to the tenement. 
Richard and Cristina and the heirs of Cristina will warrant the tene- 
ment to John and Alice and the heirs of John by the said services 
against all men, for ever. For this John and Alice gave to Richard 
and Cristina sixteen marcs of silver. 

(8*8) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Nicholas 
Le Despenser and Joan his wife, querents, and Geoffrey de Gradehowe 
and Lucia his wife, impedients, of fourteen acres of land in Notforde 
Locki. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. The impedients 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Joan, as that which Nicholas 
and Joan had by their gift. To have and to hold to Nicholas and Joan 
and the heirs of Joan, of Geoffrey and Lucia during their lives, rendering 
therefor ye'arly six shillings at the terms of Nativity of St. John Baptist, 
Michaelmas, Nativity of our Lord and Easter, for all service, etc., and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Geoffrey and Lucia all 
other services which belong to that land. The impedients during their 
lives will warrant the land by the said services to Nicholas and Joan and 
the heirs of Joan against all men. After the deaths of the impedients, 
Nicholas and Joan and the heirs of Joan shall be quit of the payment of 
the six shillings yearly and shall hold the land of the heirs of Lucia 
for ever, rendering therefor yearly one penny at Michaelmas for all 
service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Lucia's 
heirs all other services which belong to that land. And then the heirs 
of Lucia shall warrant the land to Nicholas and Joan and the heirs of 
Joan by the said services against all men, for ever. For this Nicholas 
and Joan gave to Geoffrey and Lucia one sore sparrow hawk. 

* This includes messuage, land and rent. 
14 



2IO Dorset Fines. 



(89) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between John de 
Muleburn, plaintiff, and John Goze and Nichola his wife, tenents, of two 
messuages and one virgate of land in Muleburn. John Goze and Nicola 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of John de Muleburn and 
remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Nicola to John and 
his heirs, for ever. For this he gave to John Goze and Nichola one sore 
sparrow hawk. 

(go) At Shireburn, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, between 
Alice, daughter of Adam de Corston, querent, by John Blaunechuval in 
her place, and Adam de Corston and Mathia his wife, impedients, of a 
messuage and land in Littlebrudie. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned. The impedients acknowledged the tenement to be the 
right of Alice as by their gift. To have and to hold to Alice and her 
heirs of Adam and Mathia and the heirs of Mathia for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one half penny at Michaelmas for all service, etc. More- 
over they granted for themselves and the heirs of Mathia that a messu- 
age which William Laundri and Alice his wife held for their lives, of 
Adam and Mathia and the heirs of Mathia on the day this fine was 
made, and which after the deaths of William and Alice ought to revert 
to them should instead wholly remain to Alice daughter of Adam and 
her heirs. To hold, together with the tenement aforesaid which remains 
to them by this fine as is aforesaid, of Adam and Mathia and the heirs 
of Mathia by the said service for ever. And Adam and Mathia and the 
heirs of Mathia will warrant the tenement which remains to them and 
the tenement which reverts to them by the said service to the said Alice 
daughter of Adam and her heirs against all men for ever. For this she 
gave to Adam and Mathia one sore sparrow hawk. This concord was 
made there being present William and Alice his wife who recognized 
that they had no claim in the messuage they hold as is aforesaid except 
for term of their lives, and at the court they did fealty to Alice daughter 
of Adam for the said messuage. 

\Endorscd?\ John de Sar' put in his claim. 

(gi) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Elena de 
Gorges, plaintiff, by Henry Baret in her place, and Richard Gaylard, 
Abbot of Montisburgh, tenent, by Nicholas de Castello in his place, of 
land in Bradepole and the advowson of the chapel of St. Andrew of 
Bradepole. Elena acknowledged the same to be the right of the Abbot 
and his church of St. Mary of Montisburgh and remitted the same for 
herself and her heirs to the said Abbot and his successors and his church 
for ever. For this the Abbot received Elena and her heirs into all beni- 
fits and orisons which henceforth they should do in his church for ever. 
Be it known that the Judges allowed this fine to pass because by an 
inquisition previously made before them in the same Court it was found 



1 6 Edward L ( 1 287-88). 2 1 1 

that the Abbot and his predecessors for twenty years before this fine was 
made had been in seisin of the said land and advowson. 

(92) At Shireburn, one month after the day of Holy Trinity, between 
Alice daughter of Adam de Corston, querent, and Adam de Corston and 
Mathia his wife, impedients, of land in Littlebrydie. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned. The impedients acknowledged the land to be 
the right of Alice as by their gift. To have and to hold to Alice and 
her heirs of Adam and Mathia and the heirs of Mathia for ever, render- 
ing therefor yearly one clove gillyflower at Easter for all service, etc. 
They will warrant the land to Alice and her heirs by the said service 
against all men for ever. For this she gave them one sparrow hawk. 

{Endorsed^ John de Sar* put in his claim. 

(93) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between John 
Fuke and Alice his wife, plaintiffs, and Alice who was the wife of 
Nicholas Atte Halle, tenent, of a messuage in Cheping Blaneford. The 
plaintiffs acknowledged the same to be the right of Alice Atte Halle* and 
remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Alice wife of John to 
the said Alice Atte Halle and her heirs for ever. For this she granted 
to the plaintiffs a messuage in the same vill, which is between her 
messuage and the messuage of Robert le Chaumbreleyn. To have and 
to hold to John and Alice and the heirs of John, of Alice Atte Halle and 
her heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly one pair of white gloves or 
one penny at Easter for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for Alice Atte Halle and her heirs all other services 
which belong to that messuage. The tenent and her heirs will warrant 
to John and Alice and the heirs of John the messuage which remains to 
them by this fine, by the aforesaid services against all men for ever. 

(94) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between William 
son of Thomas Cosin, plaintiff, and Ralph Wake, whom Joan who was 
the wife of Andrew Wake called to warrant and who warranted to 
her a messuage and land in Stoke Cosin and Westwode. And 
between the same plaintiff, and the same Ralph whom the same Joan 
called to warrant and who warranted to her a mill in the said vill, 
which mill Joan previously in the same Court warranted to Walter le 
Jouene and Margaret his wife. Assize of mort ancestor was summoned. 
Ralph acknowledged the whole tenement to be the right of William. 
To have and to hold to William and his heirs of Ralph and his heirs 
for ever, rendering therefor yearly eight shillings at the terms of St. 
John Baptist, Michaelmas, Nativity of our Lord and Easter, for all 
service, etc. And Ralph and his heirs will warrant the whole tenement 
to William and his heirs by the said service against all men, for ever. 
For this William gave to Ralph one sore sparrow hawk. 

 An early instance of the wife using the surname of her deceased husband. 



212 Dorset Fines. 



(95) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Brother 
Hugh, Abbot of Shireburn, querent, and Thomas le Mareschal and 
Cristiana his wife, impedients, of a messuage and mill in Shireburn* 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. The impedients acknow- 
ledged the tenement namely, that which once was of Walter Herwy in 
the said vill near the Abbey, to be the right of the Abbot and his church 
of St. Mary of Shireburne, as that which Brother Laurence once Abbot 
of Shireburn, the predecessor of this abbot, and his church formerly had 
by the gift of the aforesaid Cristiana. To have and to hold to the Ab- 
bot and his successors and his church of Thomas and Cristiana and the 
heirs of Cristiana in pure and perpetual alms for ever. The impedients 
and the heirs of Cristiana will warrant the tenement to the said Abbot 
and his successors and his church in pure and perpetual alms free, 
without any secular service therefor to be done, against all men, for 
ever. For this the Abbot gave to Thomas and Cristiana twenty shillings 
sterling. Be it known that the said Justices permitted this fine to pass* 
because before them in the same Court by an inquisition previously 
made, it was found that the Abbot and his predecessors for twenty years 
before this fine was made had been in seisin of the said tenement. 

(96) At Shireburn, one month after the day of Holy Trinity, between 
William Antony (Antonii) and Alice his wife, plaintiffs, and Ralph le 
Fraunceys, whom Avicia who was the wife of Nicholas Tuyt called to 
warrant, and who warranted to her a messuage and a moiety of one 
virgate of land in Gissiche. The plaintiffs acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of Ralph and remitted the same for themselves and the 
heirs of Alice to Ralph and his heirs for ever. For this he gave to 
William and Alice half a marc of silver. 

(97) At Shireburn, one month after the day of Holy Trinity, between 
William Antony (Antonii) and Alice his wife, plaintiffs, and Joan who 
was the wife of John de Rameseye, tenent, by William Payn in his 
place, of two virgates of land in Estburton juxta Wynfred Neeuburgh. 
The plaintiffs acknowledged the land to be the right of Joan and re- 
mitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Alice to Joan and her 
heirs for ever. For this she gave to William and Alice one marc of 
silver. 

(98) At Shireburn, one month after the day of Holy Trinity, between 
William Antony (Antonii) and Alice his wife, plaintiffs, and John le 
Engleys and Edith his wife, tenents, of a messuage and virgate of land 
in Gissiche St. Andrew. The plaintiffs acknowledged the tenement to 
be the right of John and remitted the same for themselves and the heirs 
of Alice to the tenents and the heirs of John for ever. For" this the 
tenents gave to William and Alice twenty shillings sterling. 

(99) At Shireburn, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Robert 



1 8 Edward L (1289-90). 213 

son of Robert de Shaston, querent, and William le Marner and Gun- 
nilda his wife, impedients, of eight acres of land and one third part of a 
messuage in Pydele Trentehide. Plea of warranty of deed was sum- 
moned. The querents acknowledged the tenement to be the right of 
Robert as by their gift. To have and to hold to Robert and his heirs 
of William and Gunnilda and the heirs of Gunnilda for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, etc., and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for William and Gunnilda and the 
heirs^ of Gunnilda all other services which belong to the tenement. 
William and Gunnilda and the heirs of Gunnilda will warrant the tene- 
ment to Robert and his heirs by the said services against all men for 
ever. For this Robert gave to them forty shillings sterling. 

17 Edward I. (1288-89). 

(100) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Roger de La Hide, querent, and Ralph de Stopeham, deforciant, often 
marcs of rent in Bradeford Brian and Bernardesleye. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Ralph acknowledged the rent together with the homage 
and whole service of Peter de Mohaut and John de Mohaut and their 
heirs in respect of the whole tenement which they before held of Ralph 
in the said vills to be the right of Roger and rendered the same to him. 
To have and to hold to Roger and his heirs of Ralph and his heirs for 
ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist 
for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for 
Ralph and his heirs all other services which belong to that rent. Ralph 
and his heirs will warrant the rent by the said services to Roger and his 
heirs against all men for ever. For this Roger gave to Ralph one sore 
sparrow hawk. This concord was made there being present the said 
Peter and John who agreed thereto and did fealty at the Court to the 
said Roger. 

18 Edward I. (1289-90). 

(loi) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between John 
de Berewyk, querent, and Gilbert de Appeltrefeld, deforciant, of the 
manor of West Hemelesworth and advowson of the church of the said 
manor. Plea of covenant was summoned. Gilbert acknowledged the 
manor and advowson to be the right of John as by his gift. To have 
and to hold to John and his heirs of Gilbert and his heirs for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all 
service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Gilbert 
and his heirs all other services which belong to the manor and advow- 
son. Gilbert and his heirs will warrant the manor and advowson to 



2 14 Dorset Fines. 



John and his heirs by the said services against all men, for ever. For 
this John gave to Gilbert one sore sparrowhawk. 

(102) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Edmund de Sideling, querent, and William son of Laurence de 
Sideling, impedient, of a messuage and land in Sideling. Plea of war- 
ranty of deed was summoned, William acknowledged the tenement to 
be the right of Edmund, as by gift of William. For this Edmund 
granted the tenement to William. To have and to hold to William for 
his life of Edmund and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly eleven 
shillings and one penny at Michaelmas and Easter for all service, etc. 
Edmund and his heirs will warrant the tenement to William for his life 
by the said service against all men. After the death of William the 
tenement wholly will revert to Edmund and his heirs quit of the heirs 
of William. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenement. 

(103) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Robert, Bishop of Bath and Wells, querent, and John de la 
Tylle, impedient, of two carucates of land in Lango Blaneford and the 
manor of Radelyngton in Purbyk\ Plea of warranty of deed was sum- 
moned. John acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Robert, as 
by his gift. For this Robert granted the same to the said John and 
Isabella his wife. To have and to hold to John and Isabella and the 
heirs of the body of Isabella of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the tenement for ever. Should it happen that John 
and Isabella died without heir of the body of Isabella then the tenement 
wholly shall remain to the right heirs of John, to hold of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, for ever. 

19 Edward I. (1290-91). 

(104) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter, between William 
Antony and Alice his wife, plaintiffs, and Roger de Purbik, whom the 
Abbess of Scheston called to warrant and who warranted to her a 
messuage and land in Gyssich St. Andrew. The plaintiffs acknow- 
ledged the tenement to be the right of Roger and remitted the same for 
themselves and the heirs of Alice to Roger and his heirs for ever. For 
this Roger gave to William and Alice twelve marcs of silver. 

(105) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Simon de Monte Alto and Clemencia his wife, querents, and Richard 
de Wymborn' and Matilda his wife, deforciants, of a messuage and land 
in Legh' juxta Wymborn'. Plea of covenant was summoned. The 
deforciants acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Simon as that 
which he and Clemencia had by their gift. To have and to hold to 
Simon and Clemencia and the heirs of Simon of the chief lords of that 



21 Edward I. (1292-93). 215 

fee by the services which belong to the tenement for ever. Moreover 
they granted for themselves and the heirs of Richard that they would 
warrant the same to Simon and Clemencia and the heirs of Simon 
against all men for ever, and that henceforth they would pay to William 
le Folur de Wymborn', father of Richard, whose heir he is, eight marcs 
yearly which they (Richard and Matilda) are held during their lives to 
render to the said William as in a fine between the said Richard and 
the said William more fully appears. For this Simon and Clemencia 
gave to Richard and Matilda one sore sparrow hawk. 

(106) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Roger 
de Teye and Nicholas de Sparkeford, querents, by William Caum in 
their places, and John de Aldham and Sibilla his wife, deforciants, of 
the manor of Wrambrok. Plea of covenant was summoned. The de- 
forciants acknowledged the manor to be the right of Nicholas, as that 
which Roger and Nicholas had by their gift, and rendered the manor to 
them. To have and to hold to Roger and Nicholas and the heirs of 
Nicholas of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the manor for ever. Moreover they granted for themselves and the 
heirs of Sibilla that they would warrant the manor to Roger and 
Nicholas and the heirs of Nicholas against all men, for ever. For this 
Roger and Nicholas gave to John and Sibilla one sore sparrow hawk. 

20 Edward I. (1291-92). 

(107) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John de Novo Burgo, querent, and Thomas de Novo Burgo, deforciant, 
of the manor of Wynfrod', except two messuages and two virgates of 
land in the manor. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknow- 
ledged the manor to be the right of Thomas. For this Thomas granted 
it to John and Margery his wife and rendered it. To have and to hold 
to John and Margery and the heirs of their bodies of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to that manor for ever. Should 
John and Margery die without heirs by them begotten the manor wholly 
shall remain to the right heirs of John. To hold of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to that manor for ever. 

21 Edward I. (1292-93). 

(108) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Henry 
Glyde of Mayne, querent, and John de Ludewell and Leticia his wife, 
impedients, of a messuage and land in Chalwedonboys. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned. John and Leticia acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of Henry as by their gift. To have and to hold to Henry 
and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 



2i6 Dorset Fines. 



to that tenement for ever. Moreover John and Leticia granted for 
themselves and the heirs of Leticia that they would warrant the tene- 
ment to Henry and his heirs against all men for ever. For this Henry 
gave to John and Leticia one hundred shillings of silver. 

(109) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Cristiana who was the wife of Nicholas Michel, querent, and 
Michael de Stoklaunde, deforciant, of two messuages and land in Mau- 
gerton, Loueneye and Bonewode. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Cristiana acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Michael. For 
this he granted the same to her. To have and to hold to Cristiana for 
her life, of Michael and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at 
Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, etc. And they will warrant 
the same to Cristiana by the said services against all men during her 
life. After the death of Cristiana the tenement wholly will revert to 
Michael and his heirs quit of the heirs of Cristiana, to hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to that tenement, for 
ever. 

(no) At Westminster, on the morrow of Souls, between Herbert de 
Sancto Quintino, querent, by Peter de Arnhale in his place, and John 
de la Herce and Hawysia his wife, defendants, of common of pasture 
which they claimed to have in the land of Herbert in Euershut and 
Parva Frome whereat Herbert complained. The defendants acknow- 
ledged the said common to be the right of Herbert and remitted the 
same for themselves and the heirs of Hawisia to Herbert and his heirs 
for ever. For this Herbert gave to John and Hawysia ten marcs of 
silver. 

[Endorsed,] John de Querdon and Joan his wife put in their 
claim. 

(in) At Westminster, one month after Michaelmas day, between 
Laurence Pyngge of Shaston and Hawysia his wife, querents, and 
Adam le Tayllur and Cristina his wife, deforciants, of one messuage, 
one virgate of land and one penny of rent, except one rood of land, in 
Cumpton Abbatisse. Plea of covenant was summoned. The defor- 
ciants acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Laurence as that 
which he and Hawysia had by their gift. To have and to hold to 
Laurence and Hawysia and the heirs of Laurence of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to that tenement for ever. More- 
over Adam and Cristina granted for themselves and the heirs of Cristina 
that they would warrant the same to Laurence and Hawysia and the 
heirs of Laurence against all men for ever. For this Laurence and 
Hawysia gave to Adam and Cristina twenty marcs of silver. 

(112) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between John 
de la Bere, querent, and Henry son of Stephen le Mazun, deforciant. 



21 Edward L (1292-93). 217 

of one messuage, thirty acres of land, eight acres of meadow and two 
-shillings and eight pence of rent in Wodokesworth, and afterwards re- 
corded and granted at Westminster fifteen days after the day of Holy 
Trinity, 34 Edward I., between William de la Bere brother and heir of 
the aforesaid John, querent, and the aforesaid Henry, deforciant, of the 
said tenement. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. Henry 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of William and remitted the 
same for himself and his heirs to William and his heirs for ever. More- 
over Henry granted for himself and his heirs that they will warrant the 
tenement to William and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this 
William gave to Henry twenty marcs of silver. 

[Endorsed.] Henry son of Philip son of Elyas put in his claim. 

(113) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between Richard 
son of Geoffrey de Cerne, querent, and John de Gauelbrugg', deforciant, 
of a messuage and land in Westcorscumbe. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Richard acknowledged the tenement to be the right of 
John as by his gift. For this John granted the same to Richard, To 
have and to hold to Richard during his life of John and his heirs, 
rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, etc., and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for John and his heirs all 
other services which belong to the tenement. John and his heirs will 
warrant the tenement to Richard during his life by the said services 
against all men. After his decease the tenement wholly shall revert to 
John and his heirs quit of the heirs of Richard. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which to the tenement belong, for 
ever. 

(114) At York, in the morrow of St. Martin, between John de la 
Bere, querent, and Henry son of Stephen le Mazun, deforciant, of a 
messuage, thirty acres of land, eight acres of meadow and two shillings 
and eight pence rent in Wodekesworth, which tenements Emma, who 
was the wife of Stephen le Mazun held for life, and after her death 
recorded and granted at Westminster fifteen days after the day of Holy 
Trinity, 35 Edward I., between William de la Bere brother and heir of 
the aforesaid John, querent, and the aforesaid Henry, deforciant, of the 
aforesaid tenements, which tenements Henry son of Philip son of Elias 
held by lease (ex dimissione) of the aforesaid Emma. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Henry son of Stephen acknowledged the tenements to 
be the right of William and remitted the same for himself and his heirs 
to William and his heirs for ever. Moreover Henry son of Stephen 
granted for himself and his heirs that they would warrant the tenements 
to William and his heirs against all men for ever. Be it known that 
Henry son of Philip came to the Court and rendered the tenements and 
remitted for himself and his heirs all his right and claim in the same to 



2i8 Dorset Fines. 



William and his heirs, for ever. For this William gave to Henry sorv 
of Philip twenty-two marcs of silver. 

(115) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Humfrey de Bello Campo, querent, and John de Haldham and 
Sibilla his wife, deforciants, of two parts of the manor of Ryme and the 
advowson of the Chapel of the manor. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
The deforciants acknowledged the two parts and advowson to be the 
right of Humfrey as by the grant of Sibilla. To have and to hold to 
Humfrey and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the two parts and advowson, for ever. Moreover the 
deforciants granted for themselves and the heirs of Sibilla that the third 
part of the manor which William de Wylburgham and Emma his wife 
held for life, of the inheritance of Sibilla in the said vill on the day this 
concord was made and which after their deaths ought to revert to John 
and Sibilla and the heirs of Sibilla, should then wholly remain to Hum- 
frey and his heirs. To hold, together with the said two parts and 
advowson which to him remain by this .fine, of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to that manor and advowson for ever. 
John and Sibilla and the heirs of Sibilla will warrant the manor and 
advowson to Humfrey and his heirs against all men for ever. For this 
Humfrey gave to John and Sibilla fifty marcs of silver. This concord 
was made there being present William and Emma who agreed to it and 
did fealty to Humfrey at the court. 

22 Edward I. (1293-94). 

(116) At Westminster, between Nicholas de Strode and Matilda his 
wife, querents, and Alan de Derby and Cristiana his wife, impedients, 
of two messuages of land in Woch Fraunceys and Wylisestok*. Plea 
of warranty of deed was summoned. Alan and Cristiana acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Nicholas as that which Nicholas and 
Matilda had by their gift. To have and to hold to Nicholas and 
Matilda and the heirs of Nicholas of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the tenement for ever. Moreover, the im- 
pedients granted for themselves and the heirs of Cristiana that they 
would warrant the tenement to Nicholas and Matilda and the heirs of 
Nicholas against all men, for ever. For this Nicholas and Matilda 
gave to Alan and Cristiana ten pounds sterling. 

(117) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, 
between Geoffrey, parson of the church of Chaluedon Boys, querent, by 
Walter de Tarente in his place and Walter de Okie and Mabilla his 
wife, John de Asshfold junior and Constancia his wife, Peter Bysmer 
and Matilda his wife, deforciants, of a messuage and land in Chaluedon 
Boys. Plea of covenant was summoned. The deforciants acknowledged 



2 2 Edward L (1293-94). 219 

the tenement to be the right of Geoffrey as by their gift. To have and 
to hold to Geoffrey and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the tenement for ever. Moreover the defor- 
ciants granted for themselves and the heirs of Mabilla, Constancia and 
Matilda that they would warrant the same to Geoffrey and his heirs 
against all men, for ever. For this Geoffrey gave to the deforciants 
twenty marcs of silver. 

(118) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Geoffrey de Westlulleworth, chaplain, querent, by Walter de Tarente in 
his place, and Walter de Okie and Mabilla his wife, John de Asshfold, 
junior, and Constancia his wife, Peter Bysmer and Matilda his wife and 
John de Ludewell and Leticia his wife, deforciants, of two messuages 
and land in Chaluedone Boys. Plea of covenant was summoned. The 
deforciants acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Geoffrey as 
by their gift. 'To have and to. hold to Geoffrey and his heirs of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement for 
ever. Moreover the deforciants granted for themselves and the heirs of 
Mabilla, Constancia and Matilda that they would warrant the tenement 
to Geoffrey and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this Geoffrey 
gave to the deforciants thirty pounds sterling. 

(119) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Henry le Frere de Aulton and Mabilla his wife, querents, and William 
son of Robert de Aultone, deforciant, of a messuage of land in Aulton. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. William acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of Henry and remitted the same for himself and his 
heirs to Henry and Mabilla and the heirs of Henry for ever. For this 
Henry and Mabilla gave to William seventy-five marcs of silver. 

(120) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Robert le Neweman of Wynterburne, querent, and John de 
Asshfold and Constancia his wife, impedients, of land in Muleburne St. 
Andrew. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. The impedients 
acknowledged the land to be the right of Robert as by their gift. To 
have and to hold to Robert and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to that tenement for ever. Moreover the 
impedients granted for themselves and the heirs of Constancia that they 
would warrant the tenement to Robert and his heirs against all men, 
for ever. For this Robert gave to the impedients five marcs of silver. 

(121) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between Henry 
le Gildene and Isabella his wife, querents, by Bartholomew Otery in 
their place, and John de Jardyn of Pederton and Agnes his wife, im- 
pedients, of a messuage and land in Shireburne. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned. The impedients acknowledged the tenement to 
be the right of Henry as that which he and Isabella had by their gift. 



220 Dorset Fines, 



To have and to hold to Henry and Isabella and the heirs of Henry of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that tenement 
for ever. Moreover the impedients granted for themselves and the 
heirs of Agnes that they would warrant the tenement to Henry and 
Isabella and the heirs of Henry against all men, for ever. For this 
Henry and Agnes * gave to John and Agnes fifty marcs of silver. 

(122) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between 
Thomas le Bret, querent, and William le Bret and Emma his wife, 
impedients, of two messuages and land in Vpwymburne All Saints. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. The impedients acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Thomas as by their gift. For this 
Thomas granted the same to them. To have and to hold to William 
and Emma for their lives, of Thomas and his heirs, rendering therefor 
yearly two marcs at Michaelmas, Nativity of our Lord, Easter, and 
Nativity of St. John Baptist. Thomas and his heirs will warrant the 
tenement to William and Emma during their lives by the said services 
against all men. After their deaths the tenement wholly will revert 
to Thomas and his heirs quit of the heirs of either William or Emma. 
To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
that tenement, for ever. 

24 Edward I. (1295-96). 

(123) At Westminster, three weeks after Michaelmas day, between 
Thomas de Feme, querent, and Hugh de la Hyde, deforciant, of a mes- 
suage and land in Vpwymburne Malemayns. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Thomas acknowledged the tenement to be the right of 
Hugh as by his gift. For this Hugh granted it to Thomas. To have 
and to hold to Thomas during his life, of Hugh and his heirs, render- 
ing therefor yearly two shillings at feast of All Saints, for all service, 
etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Hugh and his 
heirs all other services which belong to the tenement. After the death 

of Thomas the tenement wholly shall revert to Hugh and his heirs quit 
of the heirs of Thomas, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the tenement for ever. 

(124) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, be- 
tween Stephen Godwyne and Cristiana his wife, querents, and Robert son 
of Ralph le Mareschal of Craneford, deforciants, of two parts of two mes- 
suages, one and a half carucates of land, nine acres meadow, three acres of 
wood, twelve acres of pasture and thirty-eight shillings rent in Magna 
Craneford, which John de Monte Alto and Joan his wife hold for term of 
life, rendering therefor yearly was hundred shillings. Plea of covenant 

* So in the original, no doubt a clerical error, should be Isabella. 



25 Edward L (1296-97). 221 

was summoned. Robert acknowledged the two parts to be the right of 
Stephen and granted for himself and his heirs that the two parts which 
John and Joan held for term of life by lease of Robert in the said vill on 
the day this concord was made, and which after their deaths ought to 
revert to Robert and his heirs, should then wholly remain to Stephen 
and Cristiana and the heirs of Stephen. To hold of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to those two parts for ever. 
Robert also granted for himself and his heirs that the third part of the 
said two messuages, land and rent which Philip de Columbers and Joan 
his wife hold in dower of Joan, of the inheritance of Robert in the said 
vill on the day this concord was made and which after the decease of 
Joan ought to revert to Robert and his heirs, should then wholly remain 
to Stephen and Cristiana and the heirs of Stephen. To hold together 
with the said two parts which remain to them by this fine, of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to that tenement for ever. 
Robert and his heirs will warrant the tenement to Stephen and Cristiana 
and the heirs of Stephen against all men, for ever. For this Stephen and 
Cristiana gave to Robert one hundred shillings of silver. This concord 
was made there being present the said John and Joan who granted the 
same and did fealty to Stephen and Cristiana at the court. 

\Endorud?[ Gilbert de Middelton and Joan his wife, Alicia and 
John de Clanyle and Mathia his wife, the heirs of William Dyl put in 
their claim. 

25 Edward I. (1296-97). 

(125) At Westminster, in the morrow of Souls, between John son of 
Osbert Giffard, querent, and Osbert Giffard, deforciant, by Roger de 
Camme in his place, of the manor of Wynterburne Hutton and advow- 
son of the church of the said manor. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
The deforciant acknowledged the manor and advowson to be the right 
of John. For this John granted them to him. To have and to hold to 
Osbert, during life, of John and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one 
rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for John and his heirs all other 
services which to that manor and advowson belong. John and his heirs 
will warrant the manor and advowson to Osbert during life, by the said 
services against all men. After his decease they wholly revert to John 
and his heirs quit of the heirs of Osbert. To hold of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which to the said manor and advowson belong,, 
for ever. 

(126) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Thomas 
Crubbe, querent, and William Red and Alice his wife, impedients, of a 
messuage in Dorcestr*. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned* 



222 Dorset Fines, 



The impedients acknowledged the messuage to be the right of Thomas, 
as by their gift. To have and to hold to Thomas and his heirs of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the messuage, for 
ever. Moreover they granted for themselves and the heirs of Alice that 
they would warrant the messuage to Thomas against all men, for ever. 
For this Thomas gave to William and Alice seven marcs of silver. 

(127) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between William 
le Mareschal, querent, and William de Culeford and Avicia his wife, 
impedients, of a messuage in Dorcestr*. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned. The impedients acknowledged the messuage to be the 
right of William le Mareschal, as by their gift. To have and to hold to 
William le Mareschal and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the messuage for ever. Moreover they granted 
for themselves and the heirs of Avicia that they would warrant the 
message to William le Mareschal and his heirs against all men, for 
ever. For this William gave to William and Avicia four marcs of 
silver. 

(128) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, be- 
tween Robert de Scouill and Philip de Scouill, querents, by Walter 
Coppe in Philip's place, and John de Scouill deforciant, by William de 
Dors' in his place, of a messuage and land in Kyngeston Abbatisse. 
Plea of covenant was summoned between them. John acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Philip, as that which Robert and Philip 
had by his gift. For this they granted the tenement to John, and ren- 
dered the same. To have and to hold to John during life, of Robert 
and Philip and the heirs of Philip, rendering therefor yearly one rose at 
Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of that fee for Robert and Philip and the heirs of Philip 
all other services which to that tenement belong. After the death of 
John, if Robert and Philip are living, the tenement wholly remains to 
Robert. To have and to hold to Robert during life, of Philip and his 
heirs by the said services as is aforesaid. And after the death of Robert 
the tenement wholly will revert to Philip and his heirs quit of the heirs 
of John and Robert. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the ser- 
vices which belong to the tenement. 

(i2g) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Walter 
Stretch* de Warham and Edith his wife, querents, by Hillar&gt;' de Bere in 
their place, and Richard Gouys, deforciant, of one messuage, one caru- 
cate of land, five marcs, ten shillings and four pence rent in Muleburne 
and Chercheton, and one hundred and eleven acres of land and forty-six 
acres of pasture in Deuelys. Plea of covenant was summoned. Richard 

* ( ? ) The t's and c's so much alike, they might be all t's in this word or all c's. 



26 Edward L (1297-98). 



acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Walter, as that which 
Walter and Edith had by his gift. To have and to hold to Walter and 
Edith and the heirs of Walter of the chief lords of that fee by the ser- 
vices which belong to those tenements, for ever. Moreover Richard 
granted for himself and his heirs that they would warrant the tenements 
to Walter and Edith against all men, for ever. For this Walter and 
Edith gave to Richard one hundred pounds sterling. 

[Endorsed.] William de Gouys and Alicia his daughter put in their 
claim. 

26 Edward I. (1297-98). 

(130) At York, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Roger Fraun- 
ceys, querent, by Robert de Hanvill in his place, and William Fraun- 
ceys of Langeton, deforciant, by Robert de Wylmyndon in his place, of 
a moiety of one messuage and one carucate of land in Langeton juxta 
Wsiymuth. Plea of covenant was summoned. Roger acknowledged 
the moiety to be the right of William. For this he granted the same 
to Roger. To have and to hold to Roger and the heirs of his body of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that moiety 
for ever. Should Roger die without heir of his body, the moiety wholly 
will remain to Nicholas brother of Roger, and the heirs of his body, to 
hold as aforesaid. Should Nicholas die without heir of his body, the 
moiety wholly will remain to Walter brother of Nicholas, and the heirs 
of his body, to hold as aforesaid. Should Walter die without heir of 
his body, the moiety wholly will remain to John brother of Walter, and 
the heirs of his body, to hold as aforesaid. Should John die without 
heir of his body, the moiety wholly will remain to the right heirs 
of William quit of the other heirs of Roger, Nicholas, Walter and John. 
To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
that moiety for ever. William and his heirs will warrant the moiety to 
Roger and his heirs and also to Nicholas and his heirs if Roger died 
without heir of his body, and also to Walter and his heirs, if Nicholas 
died without heir of his body, and also to John and his heirs if Walter 
died without heirs of his body, against all men. 

(131) At York, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Nicholas 
Fraunceys, querent, by Robert de Hanvill in his place, and William 
Fraunceys of Langeton, deforciant, by Robert de Wilmyndon in his 
place, of a moiety of one messuage and one carucate of land in Lange- 
ton juxta Waymuth. Plea of covenant was summoned. Nicholas ac- 
knowledged the moiety to be the right of William. For this he granted 
the same to Nicholas. To have and to hold to Nicholas and the heirs 
of his body of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
that moiety for ever. Should Nicholas die without heir of his body. 



224 Dorset Fines. 



the moiety wholly will remain to Roger brother of Nicholas, to hold as 
aforesaid Should Roger die without heir of his brother, the moiety 
wholly will remain to Walter, brother of Roger, and the heirs of his 
body, to hold as aforesaid, etc. 

[Note.  The same remainder as in previous fine, namely to Walter, 
John, right heirs of William and the same provisoes about warranty.] 

(132) At York, in the morrow of St. Martin, between Henr&gt;' de 
Tyderleye and Matilda his wife, querents, by Bertholomew de Oteiy in 
their places, and Walter de Burgo, impedient, by William Le Warj^ner 
in his place, of a messuage and land in Catestock. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned. Henry acknowledged the tenement to be the 
right of Walter. For this he granted the same to Henr&gt;' and Matilda. 
To have and to hold to Henry and Matilda and the heirs which they 
should beget, of Walter and his heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly 
one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Walter and his heirs all other 
services which belong to that tenement for ever. Should Henry die 
without heir of himself and Matilda, then after the deaths of both the 
tenement wholly will remain to Michael son of Walter de Burgo and 
the heirs of his body, to hold of Walter and his heirs by the said ser- 
vices for ever. Should Michael die without heir of his body, then the 
tenement wholly will revert to Walter and his heirs quit of the other 
heirs of Henry and Matilda and Michael. To hold of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to that tenement, for ever. Walter 
and his heirs will warrant the tenement to Henry and Matilda and 
their heirs, and also to Michael and his heirs, if Henry died without 
heir of himself and Matilda, against all men, for ever. 

(133) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilar&gt;% between Hugh 
de la Hyde, querent, and Walter de Wymburne, impedient, of a messu- 
age and land in Legh, Hamme, Preston, and Hammedaumarle. Plea 
of warranty of deed was summoned. Walter acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of Hugh as by his gift. For this Hugh granted the same 
to Walter and Alice his sister and rendered the same to them. To have 
and to hold to Walter and Alice for their lives of Hugh and his heirs^ 
rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter for all service, etc., and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Hugh and his heirs all 
other services which belong to that tenement. Hugh and his heirs will 
warrant the tenement to Walter and Alice by the said services against 
all men, during their lives, and after their deaths the tenement wholly 
shall revert to Hugh and his heirs quit of the heirs of either Walter or 
Alice, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the tenement, for ever. 

(134) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between John le 



28 Edward I, (1299- 1300). 225 

Butyller and Matilda his wife, querents, and John le Wyte of BristolP 
and Matilda his wife, impedients, of land and seventeen shillings of rent 
in CnoUe, Cnolton, Haselbere and Blakemor. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned. John le Wyte and Matilda acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of John le Butyller as that which he and Matilda had by 
their gift. To have and to hold to John le Butyller and Matilda and the 
heirs of John of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the tenement, for ever. Moreover John le Wyte and Matilda granted 
for themselves and the heirs of Matilda his wife that they woul^ warrant 
the tenement to John le Butyller and Matilda and the heirs of John le 
Butyller against all men, for ever. For this John le Butyller and Matilda 
gave to John le Wyte and Matilda forty marcs of silver. 

(135) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Ascension, between 
Jordan Sprot, querent, by William le Warmer * in his place, and Henry 
de Aune and Alice his wife, impedients, of a messuage and land in 
Middelton Abbatis. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. Henry 
and Alice acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Jordan, as by 
their gift. To have and to hold to Jordan and his heirs of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to that tenement, for ever. 
Moreover they granted for themselves and the heirs of Alice that they 
would warrant the tenement to Jordan and his heirs against all men, 
for ever. For this Jordan gave to Henry and Alice six marcs of silver. 

(136) At Westminster, in the morrow of Ascension, between John 
Gerneys and Dionisia his wife, querents, and Henry de Aune and Alice 
his wife, deforciants, of three messuages and land in Middelton Abbatis. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. The deforciants acknowledged the 
tenement to be the right of John, as that which he and Dionisia had by 
their gift. To have and to hold to John and Dionisia and the heirs of 
John of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
tenement, for ever. Moreover they granted for themselves and the heirs 
of Alice that. they would warrant the tenement to John and Dionisia and 
the heirs of John against all men, for ever. For this John and Dionisia 
gave to Henry and Alice ten pounds sterling. 

28 Edward I. (1299-1300). 

(137) f In the morrow of St. John Baptist, between Thomas de 
London', querent, and Nichola who was the wife of Hildebrand de 
London, impedient, by John de Lauynton in her place, of one rnessuage, 
two carucates of land, sixty shillings rent, and a rent of one rose, in 

 Or Wanner. 

t It is not stated in the original fine where the Court was held, but it is probable 
that, as it was made before the same six judges who are mentioned in the next fine (138), 
namely J. de Metingham, W. de Bereford, E. de Bekingham, P. Malorre, W. Howard, 
and L. de Trykyngham who sat at York, this fine also was made at York, 

15 



226 Dorset Fines. 



Langebridie, Estlagelake and Estyep juxta Symundesberwe. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned, Thomas acknowledged the tenement 
to be the right of Nichola. For this, she granted the same to him, and 
rendered to him. To have and to hold to Thomas and the heirs of his 
body of Nichola and her heirs for ever, rendering therefor yearly to 
Nichola during her life thirty pounds at Easter and Michaelmas. After 
her death Thomas and his heirs shall render yearly to the heirs of 
Nichola one rose at the feast of Nativity of St. John Baptist for all ser- 
vice, etc., and do therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Nichola and 
her heirs all other services which belong to the tenement. After the 
death of Nichola, Thomas and his heirs shall be quit of the money pay- 
ment yearly for ever. And Nichola and her heirs will warrant the 
tenement to Thomas and his heirs by the said services, as is afore- 
said, against all men, for ever. Should Thomas die without heirs 
of his body, then the tenement wholly shall revert to Nichola and 
her heirs quit of the other heirs of Thomas. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, for 
ever. 

(138) At York, fifteen days after Michaelmas day, between Nichola 
de London', querent, by John de Lauynton in her place, and Alan de 
Derby and Cristina his wife, deforciants, of a messuage, land and eight 
shillings rent in Estyep juxta Simondesbergh. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. The deforciants acknowledged the tenement to be the 
right of Nichola as by their gift. To have and to hold to Nichola and 
her heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
the tenement, for ever. Moreover Alan and Cristina granted for them- 
selves and the heirs of Cristina that they would warrant the tenement 
to Nichola and her heirs against all men, for ever. For this Nichola 
gave to Alan and Cristina forty marcs of silver. 

(139) At York, in the morrow of Souls, between William de Bares, 
querents, and Isabella Payn, impedients, of two messuages, two caru- 
cates of land and twenty-nine shillings and sixpence rent in Suthbrok', 
Shiterton, Cheselburneford and Deuelissh. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned. Isabella acknowledged the tenement to be the right 
of William, as by her gift. For this he granted the same to her, and 
rendered the same. To have and to hold to Isabella during her life, of 
William and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the feast of 
the Nativity of St, John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing therefor 
to the chief lords of that fee for William and his heirs all other services 
which belong to the tenement. After the death of Isabella the tene- 
ment wholly will revert to William and his heirs quit of the heirs of 
Isabella. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenement, for ever. 



30 Edward L (i 301-2). 227 

29 Edward I. (1300-1). 

(140) At York, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Ralph de 
Gorges and Alianora his wife, querents, and Master Thomas de Gorges, 
impedient, by Geoffrey atte Lutone Yate in his place, of the manors of 
Ludyton Cumbe and Bradepole and the hundreds of Beminstre and La 
Redehone and the adyowson of Ludyton church. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned. Thomas acknowledged the whole to be the right 
of Ralph, as that which he and Alianora had by his gift. To have and 
to hold to Ralph and Alianora and the heirs of Ralph of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, hundreds and 
advowson, for ever. Moreover Thomas granted for himself and his 
heirs that they would warrant the same to Ralph and Alianora and the 
heirs of Ralph against all men, for ever. For this Ralph and Alianora 
gave to Thomas one hundred pounds sterling. 

(141) At York, in the morrow of Souls, between John de Orchard 
and William his brother, querents, and John de Treiberge and Muriella 
his wife, impedients, of one messuage and a fourth part of the manor 
of Burkereweston, except one virgate of land in the same manor. Plea 
of warranty of deed was summoned. The impedients acknowledged the 
tenement to be the right of William, as that which John de Orchard 
and he had by their gift. For this John and William granted the 
tenement to the impedients, and rendered the same to them. To have 
and to hold to John de Treiberge and Muriella during their lives, of John 
de Orchard and William and the heirs of William, rendering therefor 
yearly one rose at the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all 
service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for John 
and William and the heirs of William all other services which belong to 
that tenement. John and William and the heirs of William will warrant 
the tenement to John de Treiberge and Muriella, during their lives, by 
the said services against all men. After their deaths the tenement 
wholly will revert to John de Orchard and William and the heirs of 
William quit of the heirs of John de Treiberge and Muriella. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tene- 
ment. 

[Endorsed.] John son of James de Orcheyerd put in his claim. 

30 Edward L (1301-2). 

(142) At York, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Robert de 
Keynes and Alianora his wife, querents, by William de Sumerford in 
their places, and Master John de Sancto Amando, deforciant, by Roger 
de Sumerford in his place, of the manor of Tarente Keynes. Plea of 
covenant w^s sumpiQned. RQb^rt acknowledged the m9.nQr to be the 



228 Dorset Fines. 



right of John as by his gift For this John granted it to Robert and 
Alianora, and rendered the same. To have and to hold to Robert and 
Alianora and the heirs of them begotten, of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to that manor, for ever. Should Robert die 
without heir by him and Alianora, then after his and her deaths the 
manor wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Robert. To hold of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the manor. This 
concord was made by order of the King (per preceptum domini Regis). 

(143) At York, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between Geoffrey 
de Hacche and Margery his wife, querents, and Nicholas son of Geoffrey 
de Hacche, deforciant, of a messuage and two virgates of land in Blane- 
ford Martel. Plea of covenant was summoned. Geoffrey acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Nicholas, as by his gift. For this he 
granted the same to Geoffrey and Margery and rendered the same to 
them. To have and to hold to Geoffrey and Margery during their lives, 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement 
After their deaths the tenement wholly shall remain to Joan daughter of 
Geoffrey and the heirs of her body. To hold of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to the tenement, for ever. Should 
Joan die without heir of her body, then the tenement wholly shall 
remain to Alice sister of Joan and the heirs of her body. To hold as 
above. Should Alice die without heir of her body, then the tenement 
wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Geoffrey quit of the heirs of 
Joan and Alice. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to that tenement, for ever. 

(144) At York, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, between 
William de Sar* and Miliaria his wife, querents, and Hugh de Lange- 
londe, deforciant, of the manor of Crofton. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Hugh acknowledged the manor to be the right of William and 
rendered the same to him. To have and to hold to William and Hillaria 
and the heirs of William of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the manor, for ever. Moreover Hugh granted for him- 
self and his heirs that they will warrant the manor to William and 
Hillaria and the heirs of William against all men, for ever. For this 
William and Hillaria gave to Hugh one hundred pounds sterling. 

(145) At York, in the morrow of Souls, between John le Calewe, 
junior, querent, and John le Calewe de Dunesweston, senior, deforciant, 
of one messuage, one mill, one carucate of land and thirty acres of wood 
in Dunesweston. Plea of covenant was summoned. John, senior, ac- 
knowledged the tenement to be the right of John, junior, as by his gift. 
For this, John, junior, granted the tenement to John, senior, and ren- 
dered the same to him. To have and to hold to John, senior, during 
life, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that 



30 Edward L (i 301-2). 229 

tenement. After the death of John, senior, the tenement wholly shall 
remain to Roger de Stapelbrygg for his life. To hold of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement. And after 
the death of Roger the tenement wholly shall remain to the right heirs 
of John, junior, quit of the heirs of John, senior and of Roger. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tene- 
ment, for ever. 

(146) At York, in the Octaves of St. Martin, between William Burdet, 
querent, by William Dorcestr', in his place, and William son 6f William 
de Stokes, deforciant, by John de Middilton in his place, of a messuage 
and land in Lulleworth St. Andrew. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
The querent acknowledged the tenement to be the right of William son 
of William. For this he granted the same to William Burdet. To 
have and to hold to William Burdet during his life, of William son of 
William and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at feast of the 
Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of that fee for William son of William and his heirs all 
other services which belong to the tenement. William son of William 
and his heirs will warrant the tenement to William Burdet during his 
life, by the said services against all men. After his decease the tene- 
ment wholly will revert to William son of William and his heirs quit of 
the heirs of William Burdet. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to the tenement, for ever. 

(147) At York, in the morrow of St. Martin, between Philippa Wake, 
querent, by John Blaunchival in her place, and Warin Martin, defor- 
ciant, by David de Servynton in his place, of a messuage and land in 
Brodesideling. Flea of covenant was summoned. Fhilippa acknow- 
ledged the tenement to be the right of Warin. For this he granted it 
to her. f To have and to hold to Fhilippa for her life, of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement After her 
death the tenement wholly shall remain to Robert de Euercy and the 
heirs of his body. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the ser- 
vices which belong to the tenement, for ever. Should Robert die with- 
out heir of his body, then the tenement wholly shall remain to Edmund 
Martin and his heirs quit of the heirs of Fhilippa and also of the other 
heirs of Robert. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the tenement for ever. 

(148) At York, three weeks after Michaelmas day, between John son 
of John de Salesburi, querent, and William Charin and Alice his wife, 
deforciants, of one messuage, four virgates of land and four shillings of 
rent in Litlebridie. Flea of covenant was summoned. The deforciants 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of John, as by their gift. 
To have and to hold to John and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee 



ijo Dorset Fines. 



by the services which belong to the tenement, for ever. Moreover they 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Alice that they would warrant 
the tenement to John and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this 
John gave to William and Alice one hundred marcs of silver. 

31 Edward L (1302-3). 

(149) At York, in the octaves of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Geoffrey de Wermewell and Isabella his wife, querents, 
by John Payn in their places, and Stephen Pruwet, deforciant, by Thomas 
Aude in his place, of two messuages, two and a half carucates of land, 
thirty-four acres of meadow and forty-six shillings and fivepence of rent 
in Corfhull juxta Reppole, Ronwaldesweye and Brodeweye. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Geoffrey acknowledged the tenement to be 
the right of Stephen, as by his gift. For this Stephen granted the same 
to Geoffrey and Isabella and rendered it to them. To have and to hold 
to Geoffrey and Isabella and the heirs they should beget, of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, for ever. 
Should Geoffrey die without heir of himself and Isabella, then after 
both their deaths the tenement wholly shall remain to the right heirs of 
Geofifrey. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenement, for ever. 

(150) At York, in the morrow of St. John Baptist, between John de 
Lusteshull, clerk, querent, and Roger de Norton, deforciant, by Roger de 
Sturton in his place, of a messuage and land in Shaston. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Roger acknowledged the tenement to be the right of John, 
and rendered the same to him. To have and to hold to John and his heirs 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement. 
Moreover Roger granted for himself and his heirs that they would warrant 
the tenement to John and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this 
John gave to Roger twenty pounds sterling, 

(151) At York, in the octaves of St. Hilary between John Basset of 
Aldeburn and John his son, querents, by Nicholas Ganard in their place, 
and Hugh Kynemere of Brydeport, impedient, by William Malerbe in 
his place, of a messuage in Shyreburn. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned. Hugh acknowledged the messuage to be the right of John 
Basset, as that which he and his son had by Hugh's gift. For this 
they granted it to Hugh and rendered the same to him. To have and 
to hold to Hugh for life, of John Basset and his son and the heirs of 
John Basset, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St John 
Baptist for all service, etc And they will warrant the messuage to 
Hugh during his life by the said services. After the death of Hugh 
the messuage wholly will revert to John Basset and John his son and 
the heirs of John Basset quit of the heirs of Hugh. To hold of the 



33 Edward L (1304-5). 231 

chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the messuage, for 
ever. 

32 Edward I. (1303-4). 

(152). At York, in the morrow of St. John Baptist, between Walter 
Scammel and Edith his wife, querents, and John Le Frenshe, deforciant, 
of a messuage and land in Wyndelham. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Walter acknowledged the tenement to be the right of John, as 
by his gift. For this John granted it to Walter and Edith, and rendered 
it to them. To have and to hold to Walter and Edith and the heirs of 
Walter of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
that tenement, for ever. 

(153) At York, one month after the day of St. Michael, between 
Robert Fitz Paen and Isabella his wife, querents, by John de Middelton 
in their place, and John de Whytefeld and Alice his wife, deforciants, of 
the manor of Frome Whytefeld. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
John and Alice acknowledged the manor to be the right of Robert and 
remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Alice to Robert and 
Isabella and the heirs of Robert for ever. Moreover they granted that 
they would' warrant the same to Robert and Isabella and the heirs of 
Robert against all men, for ever. For this Robert and Isabella gave to 
John and Alice one hundred marcs of silver. 

(154) At York, one month after the day of St. Michael, between 
Robert Fitz Paen and Isabella his wife, querents, by John de Middel- 
ton in their places, and Richard de Portes, deforciant, by John Seculer 
in his place, of the manor of Frome Whytefeld, Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Richard acknowledged the manor to be the right of Ro- 
bert as that which he and Isabella had by his gift. To have and to 
hold to Robert and Isabella and the heirs of Robert of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to that manor for ever. More- 
over Richard granted for himself and his heirs that they would warrant 
the manor to Robert and Isabella and the heirs of Robert against all 
men^ for ever. For this Robert and Isabella gave to Richard two 
hundred pounds sterling. 

33 Edward I. (1304-5)- 

(155) At Westminster, in the octaves of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Peter Malorre, querent, and John Emory, im- 
pedient, of one messuage, one mill and one carucate of land in Scotting- 
waye. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. John acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Peter as by his gift. To have and to 
hold to Peter and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the tenement, for ever. Moreover John granted for 



^32 Dorset Fines, 



himself and his heirs that they would warrant the tenement to Peter and 
his heirs against all men, for ever. For this Peter gave to John one 
hundred marcs of silver. 

{156) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, 
between John son of Elias de La Mare, querent, and Gunnora de 
Valoniis, deforciant, by William Pylk' in her place, of the manor of 
Asshemere and advowson of the church. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Gunnora acknowledged the manor and advowson to be the 
right of John, as by her gift. For this he granted them to Gunnora and 
rendered them to her. To have and to hold to Gunnora for life, of John 
and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John 
Baptist for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that 
fee for John and his heirs all other services which belong to that manor 
and advowson. After the death of Gunnora the manor and advowson 
wholly shall revert to John and his heirs quit of the heirs of Gunnora. 
To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
that manor and advowson, for ever. 

(157) At York, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 32 
Edward L, and afterwards recorded and granted at Westminster in the 
octaves of St. John Baptist, 33 Edward L, between Gilbert son of John 
de Elsefeld, querent, and John de Elsefeld, deforciant, of a messuage and 
land in Westperele and the advowson of the church of that vill, which 
William de Medburne, clerk, holds for life. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. John acknowledged the tenement and advowson to be the right 
of Gilbert, and granted for himself and his heirs that the tenement and 
advowson which the aforesaid William held for life by lease of the said 
John in the said vill, on the day this concord was made, and which after 
his death ought to revert to him and his heirs, should then remain to 
Gilbert and his heirs. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the ser- 
vices which belong to that tenement and advowson, for ever. John and 
his heirs will warrant the tenement and advowson to Gilbert and his 
heirs against all men, for ever. For this Gilbert gave to John one hundred 
marcs of silver. This concord was made in the presence of William, 
who agreed thereto and did fealty to Gilbert at the Court. 

(158) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Reginald de Panely and Alianora his wife, querents, and Nicholas son of 
Nicholas de Monte Forti, deforciant, of a moiety of the manor of 
Wynterburn St. Martin. Plea of covenant was summoned. Reginald 
acknowledged the moiety to be the right of Nicholas, who, for this, 
granted the same to Reginald and Alianora, and rendered it to them. 
To have and to hold to Reginald and Alianora, for the life of Alianora, 
of Nicholas and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at the 
Nativity of St. John Baptist, for all service, etc., and doing therefor to 



33 Edward L (1304-5)- 233 

the chief lords of that fee for Nicholas and his heirs all other services 
which belong to that moiety. After the death of Alianora the moiety 
wholly will revert to Nicholas and his heirs quit of the heirs of Alianora. 
To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
that moiety, for ever. 

(159) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Reginald de Panely and Alianora his wife, querents, and Nicholas son of 
Nicholas de Monte Forti, deforciant, of a moiety of the manor of Wynter- 
burne St. Martin. Plea of covenant was summoned. Reginald acknow- 
ledged the moiety to be the right of Nicholas, who, for this, granted the 
same to Reginald and Alianora and rendered it to them. To have and to 
hold to Reginald and Alianora for their lives, of Nicholas and his heirs, 
rendering therefor yearly one rose at the Nativity of St. John Baptist, 
for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for 
Nicholas and his heirs all other services which belong to that moiety. 
After the deaths of Reginald and Alianora the moiety wholly will revert 
to Walter son of Reginald and the heirs of his body. To hold of 
Nicholas and his heirs by the aforesaid services, for ever. Should 
Walter die without heirs of his 6ody, then the moiety wholly shall 
revert to Nicholas and his heirs quit of the heirs of Reginald and 
Alianora and also of the other heirs of Walter. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to that moiety for ever. 

(160) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between John de 
Novo Burgo and Elizabeth his wife, querents, and Reginald de Lulle- 
worth, deforciant, of the manor of Estlulleworth. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Reginald acknowledged the manor to be the right of John, 
as that which he and Elizabeth had by his gift. To have and to hold 
to John and Elizabeth and the heirs of John of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to that manor for ever. Moreover 
Reginald granted for himself and his heirs that they would warrant the 
manor to John and Elizabeth and the heirs of John against all men, 
for ever. For this John and Elizabeth granted to Reginald one mes- 
suage and one carucate of land in the said vill which once were of 
William de Lulleworth father of Reginald, and rendered the same to 
him. To have and to hold to Reginald for life, of John and Elizabeth 
and the heirs of John, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of 
St. John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for John and Elizabeth and the heirs of John all other 
services which belong to that tenement. After the death of Reginald 
that tenement wholly shall revert to John and Elizabeth and the heirs 
of John quit of the heirs of Reginald. To hold of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to that tenement, for ever. 

(161) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Adam 



^34 Dorset Fines. 



son of Laurence Cok' of Corf Castel and Matilda his wife, querents, 
and Elias Portejoye and Joan his wife, deforciants, of a messuage in 
Corf Castel. Plea of covenant was summoned. Elias and Joan ac- 
knowledged the messuage to be the right of Adam, as that which he 
and Matilda had by their gift. To have and to hold to Adam and Ma- 
tilda and the heirs of Adam of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to that messuage, for ever. Moreover Elias and Joan 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Joan that they would warrant 
the messuage to Adam and Matilda and the heirs of Adam against all 
men, for ever. For this Adam and Matilda gave to Elias and Joan one 
hundred shillings of silver. 

(162) At Westminster, in the octaves of St Martin, between John 
Le Moygne, querent, and John de Asshfeld and Constancia his wife, 
impedients, of two messuages, thirty-two acres and one rood of land, one 
acre of meadow and thirty-two pence of rent in Estgawelton and West- 
gawelton. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. John and Con- 
stancia acknowledged the tenement to be the right of John Le Moygne 
as by their gift. To have and to hold to John Le Moygne and his heirs 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that tene- 
ment, for ever. Moreover they granted for themselves and the heirs of 
Constancia that they would warrant the tenement to John Le Moygne 
and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this John Le Moygne gave 
to John and Constancia twenty marcs of silver. 

34 Edward L (1305-6). 

(163) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between John 
de Hertrigg' and Nichola his wife, querents, and Sibilla Oliver, defor- 
ciant, of the manor of Wambrok' juxta Cherdestok' and the advowson 
of the chapel of the said manor, and the homages and services of William 
son of Henry Baret and Cristina de Stokland in respect of the tene- 
ments which are held of Sibilla in Maugerton juxta Beyminstr'. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. Sibilla acknowledged the tenements and 
advowson to be the right of John, as that which he and Nichola had by 
her gift. For this John and Nichola granted to Sibilla the tenements, 
except the advowson, and rendered the same to her. To have and to 
hold to Sibilla for life, of John and Nichola and the heirs of John, ren- 
dering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John for all service, 
etc, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for John and Nichola 
and the heirs of John all other services which belong to that tenement. 
After the death of Sibilla the tenement wholly shall remain to William 
son of Sibilla, to hold of John and Nichola and the heirs of John by the 
said services, as is aforesaid, during the life of William, with reversion 
after his death to John and Nichola and the heirs of John quit of the 



54 Edward L (1305-6). 235 

heirs of Sibilla and William. To hold together with the advowson 
which to them remains by this fine of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which to the tenements and advowson belong, for ever. 

(164) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
William Russel, querent^ by Roger de Wyk* in his place, and Richard 
de Derneford, deforciant, of two parts of one messuage and two caru- 
cates of land in Estthynham and Westthynham. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. William acknowledged the two parts to be the right 
of Richard, as by his gift To have and to hold to Richard and his 
heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
two parts, for ever. Moreover William granted for himself and his 
heirs that a third part of one messuage and two carucates of land which 
Robert de Rocheford and Margareta his wife hold, as the dower of Mar- 
garet, of the inheritance of William in the said vills on the day this 
concord was made and which after the death of Margaret ought to revert 
to William and his heirs, should wholly remain to Richard and his heirs. 
To hold together with the aforesaid two parts which remain to him by 
this fine, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
those tenements for ever. William and his heirs will warrant the same 
to Richard and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this Richard 
gave to William one hundred marcs of silver. This concord was made, 
there being present Robert and Margareta who agreed thereto and did 
fealty to Richard at the court. 

(165) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Walter Heryng, querent, and Adam Heryng, deforciant, of a messuage 
and land in Chalnedon Harang and La Dene. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Walter* acknowledged the tenement to be the right of 
Walter, as by his gift. For this Walter granted it to Adam and rendered 
the same to him at the court. To have and to hold to Adam for life, 
of Walter his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of 
St. John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for Walter and his heirs all other services which belong 
to the tenement. After the death of Adam the tenement wholly will 
revert to Walter and his heirs, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to the tenement, for ever. 

(166) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between John 
de Clavill and Isabella his wife, querents, by Richard Bastard in their 
place, and Nicholas, vicar of the church of Mordon, deforciant, of a 
messuage and land in Mordon. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
John acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Nicholas, as by his 
gift. For this Nicholas granted the tenement to John and Isabella, 

* Sic, in original. Clerical error, no doubt it should be Adam. 



236 Dorset Fines. 



and rendered the same to them at the court. To have and to hold to 
John and Isabella and the heirs of John of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to that tenement for ever. 

(167) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John de Bengervill and Edith his wife, querents, and Master Ralph 
Wastepre, deforciant, of one messuage, one carucate of land and eight 
shillings of rent in Petrethesham and Wodekesworth juxta Wymbum 
Mynystre. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknowledged the 
tenement to be the right of Ralph as by his gift. For this Ralph 
granted it to John and Edith and rendered the same to them at the 
court. To have and to hold to John and Edith and the heirs of John of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, 
for ever. 

(168) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Roger 
de Blockesworth, querent, and Roger de La Granette and Cristina his 
wife, impedients, of three messuages, twenty-two acres of land, pasture 
for thirty sheep, one horse, four oxen and six pigs in Wynterburne 
Kyngeston juxta Bere. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. 
Roger and Cristina acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Roger 
de Blockesworth, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Roger de 
Blockesworth and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the tenement, for ever. Moreover Roger and Cristina 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Cristina that they would warrant 
the tenement to Roger de Blockesworth and his heirs against all men, 
for ever. For this he gave to Roger de la Granette and Cristina twenty 
pounds sterling. 

(169) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, 
between John son of John de Melepleshe, querent, by William Le Frere 
in his place, and John de Melepleshe, deforciant, by Simon de Remmes- 
bury in his place, of the manor of West Melepleshe, except four virgates 
of land in the said manor. Plea of covenant was summoned. The 
querent acknowledged the same to be the right of John de Melepleshe, 
who, for this, granted it to John son of John and rendered the same to 
him at the court. To have and to hold to John son of John and the heirs 
of his body of John de Melepleshe and his heirs, for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly to John de Melepleshe for life, forty pounds at Nativity of 
St. John Baptist and Nativity of our Lord. After the death of John de 
Melepleshe, the querent and his heirs shall render yearly to the heirs of 
John de Melepleshe one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all ser- 
vice, etc., and do therefor to the chief lords of that fee for John de Mele- 
pleshe and his heirs all other services which belong to that manor. 
Should John son of John die without heir of his body, then the manor 
wholly will remain to William, brother of John son of John, and the 



34 Edward L (1305-6). 237 

heirs of his body. To hold as aforesaid. Should William die without 
heir of his body, then the manor wholly will remain to Thomas, brother 
of William, and the heirs of his body. To hold as aforesaid. Should 
Thomas die without heir of his body, then the manor wholly will remain 
to Hugh, brother of Thomas, and the heirs of his body. To hold as 
aforesaid. John de Melepleshe and his heirs will warrant the manor by 
the said services to John son of John and the heirs of his body and also 
to William and the heirs of his body if John son of John died without 
heir of his body, and also to Thomas and the heirs of his body if William 
died without heir of his body, and also to Hugh and the heirs of his body 
if Thomas died without heir of his body, against all men, for ever. 
Should Hugh die without heir of his body, then the manor, as is afore- 
said, wholly shall revert to John de Melepleshe and his heirs quit of the 
other heirs of John son of John, William, Thomas and Hugh. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which to that manor belong, 
for ever. 

(170) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Henry de Thomhull and Alianora his wife, querents, by John de Middel- 
ton in their place, and Roger Serocy, impedient, by Richard de Derneford 
in his place, of a messuage and land in Lydelinch. Plea of warranty of 
deed was summoned. Roger acknowledged the tenement to be the 
right of Henry, as that which he and Alianora had by his gift. To have 
and to hold to Henry and Alianora and the heirs of Henry of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to that tenement. More- 
over Roger granted for himself and his heirs that they would warrant 
the tenement to Henry and Alianora and the heirs of Henry against all 
men for ever. For this Henry and Alianora gave to Roger twenty 
marcs of silver. 

(171) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, 
between John Huse, querent, and John de Berewyco, impedient, of the 
manor of Moreton. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. The 
impedient acknowledged the manor to be the right of John Huse, as by 
his gift. To have and to hold to John Huse and his heirs of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to that manor, for ever. 
Moreover John de Berewyco granted for himself and his heirs that they 
will warrant the manor to John Huse and his heirs against all men for 
ever. For this John Huse gave to John de Berewyco two hundred 
pounds sterling. 

(172) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, 
between Henry Shyrard and Alice his wife, querents, and Stephen Pru- 
wet, deforciant, of the manor of Lyttlemayne and advowson of the 
chapel of that manor and thirty-three shillings and fourpence of rent, 
and a rent of fifteen cart loads of turf and pasture for twelve oxen and 



238 Dorset Fines, 



ten cows in Waldych and WermewelL Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Henry acknowledged the tenement and advowson to be the right of 
Stephen, as by his gift. For this Stephen granted them to Henry and 
Alice and rendered them to them at the court. To have and to hold to 
Henry and Alice and the heirs of Henry of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to that tenement and advowson, for ever. 

(173) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between John 
de Clavill of Quarera and Mathea his wife, querents, by John de Harpe- 
dene in their place, and Richard de Derneford, deforciant, of land in 
Redlyngtone. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Richard, as by his gift. For this Richard 
granted it to John and Mathea, and rendered it to them at the court. 
To have and to hold to John and Mathea and the heirs of John of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that tenement, 
for ever. 

(174) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between John de Monte Alto and Agnes his wife, by 
John de Bnideport in their place, and Peter de Monte Alto, deforciant, 
by Robert Scoy in his place, of a messuage and land in Bradeford, Brian, 
Kyngestone and Bernardele. Plea of covenant was summoned. John 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Peter. For this Peter 
granted the tenement to John and Agnes. To have and to hold to John 
and Agnes and the heirs which they beget, of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to that tenement, fqr ever. Should John 
die without such heirs, then after the deaths of both John and Agnes 
the tenement wholly shall remain to the right heirs of John. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that tene- 
ment, for ever. 

(175) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between John de Sunnynghull, querent, and Alice Quyn- 
tyn, deforciant, of the manor of Stintesford. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Alice acknowledged the manor to be the right of John, and 
rendered the same to him at the court. To have and to hold to John 
and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the manor, for ever. Moreover Alice granted for herself and her 
heirs that they would warrant the manor to John and his heirs against 
all men for ever. For this John gave to Alice one hundred pounds ster- 
ling. 

(176) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, be- 
tween Ralph Pedeleure and Cristina his wife, querents, and William 
Royne, deforciant, of one messuage, one virgate of land, three acres of 
meadow and ten shillings of rent in Mortone. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. William acknowledged the t^n^ment to b^ the right of 



34 Edward I. (1305-6). 239 

Ralph, and rendered the same to Ralph and Cristina at the court. To 
have and to hold to Ralph and Cristina and the heirs of Ralph of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that tenement, for 
ever. Moreover William granted for himself and his heirs that they 
will warrant the tenement to Ralph and Cristina and the heirs of Ralph 
against all men, for ever. For this Ralph and Cristina gave to William 
ten marcs of silver. 

(177) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist^ between 
William Russel and Alice his wife, querents, by Roger de Wyk' in his 
place, and Richard de Derneford, deforciant, of a messuage and land 
in Estthynham and Westthynham. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
William acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Richard as by 
his gift. For this he granted it to William and Alice, and rendered it 
to them at the court. To have and to hold to William and Alice and 
the heirs which they beget, of Richard and his heirs, for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St John Baptist for all service, 
etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Richard and his 
heirs all other services which belong to that tenement. Should William 
die without heir by Alice, she surviving, then the tenement wholly shall 
remain to her and the heirs of her body. To hold of Richard and his 
heirs by the said services, for ever. Should Alice die without heir of 
her body, then the tenement wholly will revert to Richard and his heirs 
quit of the other heirs of William and Alice. To hold of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, for ever. 

(178) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Robert son of Nicholas de Strode, querent, and Nicholas de Strode, 
deforciant, of two messuages^ three carucates of land, twelve acres of 
meadow, ten acres of pasture, one acre of wood, and ten shillings rent 
in Wrothfraunceys and Podyngton. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Nicholas acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Robert as by his 
gift. For this Robert granted it to Nicholas, and rendered the same to 
him at the Court. To have and to hold to Nicholas for life of Robert 
and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John 
Baptist for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that 
fee for Robert and his heirs all other services which belong to the tene- 
ment. After the death of Nicholas the tenement wholly shall revert to 
Robert and his heirs, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to that tenement, for ever, 

(179) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Robert 
de Kyrseheye, querent, by Simon de Remmesbury in his place, and 
William de Shotecumbe senior, deforciant, by John de Shirburne in his 
place, of a messuage and land in Shotecumbe, Asshe and Netherbury. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. William acknowledged the tenement 



240 Dorset Fines. 



to be the right of Robert and rendered the same to him at the court. 
To have and to hold to Robert and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to the tenement, for ever. Moreover 
William granted for himself and his heirs that they will warrant the 
tenement to Robert and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this 
Robert gave to William twenty pounds sterling. 

35 Edward I. (1306-7). 

(180) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Joan 
who was the wife of Richard de Gouiz, querent^ by John Scoy in her 
place, and Hugh Fyllol, deforciant, by John de Brideport in his place, of 
a messuage and land in Halghwell juxta Brodeweye. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Joan acknowledged the tenement to be the right of 
Hugh. For this he granted it to her, and rendered the same to her at 
the court. To have and to hold to Joan and the heirs of her body of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, for 
ever. Should Joan die without heir of her body, then the tenement 
wholly shall remain to Robert de Gouiz and his heirs, quit of the other 
heirs of Joan. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the tenement, for ever. 

(181) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between James 
de Mohun, querent, and Peter son of Reginald and Ela his wife, deforci- 
ants, of a messuage and land in Maupudre and advowson of the church. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Peter and Ela acknowledged the 
tenement and advowson to be the right of James as by their gift. For 
this he granted the same to them and rendered to them at the court. 
To have and to hold to Peter and Ela during their lives, of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement and 
advowson. After their deaths the tenement and advowson wholly shall 
remain to Reginald son of Peter and the heirs of his body. To hold of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, 
for ever. Should Regmald die without heir of his body, then the tene- 
ment and advowson wholly will remain to James, brother of Reginald, 
and the heirs of his body. To hold as above. Should James die without 
heir of his body, then the tenement and advowson wholly will remain to 
the right heirs of Ela, quit of the other heirs of Reginald and James. 
To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
tenement, for ever. 

(182) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Edward Robe de Lym and Agnes his wife, querents, and Robert Corbyn 
de Brydport, deforciant, of four messuages and six acres of land in 
Brydeport and Waledych Sermevill. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Robert acknowledged the tenement to be the right of Edward, as that 



35 Edward L (1306-7). 241 

which he and Agnes had by his gift. For this they granted the tenement 
to Robert and rendered the same to him at the Court. To have and to 
hold to Robert for life of Edward and Agnes and the heirs of Edward, 
rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all 
service, etc., and doing therefor for Edward and Agnes and the heirs of 
Edward all other services which belong to the tenement. After the 
death of Robert the tenement wholly will revert to Edward and Agnes 
and the heirs of Edward quit of the heirs of Robert. To hold of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, 
for ever. 

(183) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Roger de La Dene and Matilda his wife, querents, by John 
Aygnel in their place, and William de Middelton and John Curnays, 
deforciants, by John de Holte in their place, of a messuage and land in 
Walteford and Chilbrigg'. Plea of covenant was summoned. Roger 
acknowledged the tenement to be the right of William, as that which 
William and John had by his gift. For this they granted the tenement 
to Roger and Matilda and rendered the same to them at the Court. To 
have and to hold to Roger and Matilda and the heirs of Roger of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, for 
ever. 

(184) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between William 
Anketyl and Isabella his wife, querents, by Henry Le Gyldene in their 
place, and Roger Guldene, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Stur- 
prewes. Plea of covenant was summoned. William acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Roger, as by his gift. F*or this Roger 
granted the same to William and Isabella, and rendered it to them at 
the court. To have and to hold to William and Isabella and the heirs 
they should beget of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenement, for ever. Should William die without such 
heirs, then after the deaths of both William and Isabella the tenement 
wholly will remain to the right heirs of William. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenement, for 
ever. 

(185) At Westminster in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Henry 
Friday, querent, by Walter Huchun in his place; and Richard Canon 
and Isabella his wife, deforciants, of a messuage and land in Muleburn 
St. Andrew. Plea of covenant was summoned. Henry acknowledged 
the tenement to be the right of Isabella. For this Richard and Isabella 
granted the same to Henry. To have and to hold to Henry and the 
heirs of his body of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenement, for ever. Should Henry die without heir of his 
body, then the tenement wholly shall remain to Richard his brother and 

16 



242 Dorset Fines, 

the heirs of his body. To hold as aforesaid. Should Richard die without 
heir of his body, then the tenement wholly shall remain to the right 
heirs of Henry. To hold as aforesaid, Richard and Isabella and the 
heirs of Isabella will warrant the tenement to Henry and his heirs, and 
also to Richard and his heirs if Henry died without heir of his body, 
and also to the right heirs of Henry if Richard died without heir of his 
body, against all men, for ever. 

DIVERS COUNTIES. 

3 Edward I. (1274-75). 

GLOUCESTER, SOMERSET, BERKS, WILTS, DORSET. 

(27) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Robert, Bishop of Bath and Wells, querent, and John, Abbot of Glaston, 
deforciant, of the advowson of the church of Boclaunde in county of 
Dorset [and property in the above mentioned other counties]. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. The Abbot remitted for himself and his suc- 
cessors and his church of Glaston their right in the same to the Bishop, 
who, and his successors, shall henceforth hold the same in chief of the 
King and his heirs, for ever ; and also granted that they would acquit 
the Bishop and his successors towards the King and his heirs of all 
services belonging to the property, saving to himself and his successors 
certain yearly pensions which his predecessors were accustomed to re- 
ceive [out of property in the other counties], for ever. For this the 
Bishop remitted for himself, his successors and his church to the Abbot, 
his successors and his church their right, amongst other property in the 
manor of Boclaund, excepting the advowson of the church of the said 
vill, which advowson remains by this fine to the Bishop and his suc- 
cessors, for ever. Thus the Abbot and his successors henceforth shall 
hold that manor [and manors in the other counties] as in demesne and 
all other things belonging to the same, of the King and his heirs in 
chief by the services which belong thereto, for ever. Moreover the 
Bishop remitted for himself, his successors and his church to the Abbot, 
his successors and his church, their right in eleven pounds and five 
shillings sterling which his predecessors were accustomed to receive 
from the Abbot's predecessors from the hundreds of Wytstan and 
Wyteleye and for the turns and aids of the sheriff in the Abbot's 
lands, for ever, and their right in a moiety of all amercements, 
fines for mercy, trespass, licences to agree, goods and chattels of 
fugitives and condemned persons, for murder,* for oxen arising from 

* The fine called " murdrum ". 



Divers Counties, Edward /. 243 

disseisin, for lands, fees and the men of the abbot and his successors, 
and all men and fees of the said men, for ever. Which eleven pounds 
and five shillings will remain to the Abbot, his successors and his church 
by this fine. This concord was made between them, saving to the 
Bishop, his successors and his church, and to the Abbot, his successors 
and his church all other articles contained in a chirograph between the 
the same Bishop and Abbot, to which were appended their seals, and 
which articles are not mentioned in this fine. Likewise this concord 
was made in the presence of the King, who agreed thereto, saving to 
himself and his heirs whatever right they might have in the said eleven 
pounds and five shillings and in the articles aforesaid. Moreover this 
concord was made by the assent and at the wish of the Prior and con- 
vent of Bath and the Dean and Chapter of Wells who sent to the 
Justices their letters patent thereupon. 

4 Edward I. (1275-76). 
SOMERSET, DORSET. 

(48) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Alye- 
nora, Queen of England, consort of the King, querent, by Walter de 
Kancia in her place, and Henry de Novo Burgo, deforciant, of the manor 
of Herdecote and six knights' fees and three parts of a knight's fee in 
Meleburne Bubbe, Swanewyk, Wrokeshale, Athelardeston, Wyndelham 
and Esse. Plea of covenant was summoned. Henry acknowledged 
the fees to be the right of the Queen, as by his gift. To have and to 
hold to the Queen and her heirs, of the King and his heirs, by the services 
which belong to the tenement, for ever. Moreover Henry granted for 
himself and his heirs that the said manor which Lucia who was the wife 
of Robert de Novo Burgo held in dower of him of his inheritance on the 
day this concord was made, and which after her decease ought to revert 
to him and his heirs, should then wholly remain to the Queen and her 
heirs. To hold together with the fees, of the King and his heirs by the 
services aforesaid, for ever. For this the Queen gave to Henry two 
hundred pounds sterling. This concord was made, Lucia being present 
who acknowledged she had no right in the manor except in name of 
dower. 

[Endorsed.] John de Novo Burgo put in his claim. 

6 Edward L (1277-78). 

HERTFORD, DORSET, LINCOLN AND IRELAND. 

(73) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Ed- 
mund son of Warin de Bassyngbourne, querent, and Thomas de Clare, 



i44 Dorset Fines. 



impedient, by Stephen de Slapton in his place, of the manor of Tarente 
in county of Dorset [and property in the other above mentioned coun- 
ties]. Plea of covenant was summoned. Thomas acknowledged the 
m^nor of Bleburgh, co. Lincoln to be the right of Edmund, as by his 
gift. To have and to hold to Edmund and his heirs of the chief lords 
of those fees by the services belonging to that manor, for ever. And 
Thomas granted for himself and his heirs that they would warrant that 
manor to Edmund and his heirs against all men, for ever. Moreover 
Thomas granted for himself and his heirs that henceforth they shall not 
give, sell, pledge nor alienate the manors of Plessetis, co. Hertford and 
Tarente, co. Dorset, lest they should then be unable to warrant the 
manor of Bleburgh, co. Lincoln, to Edmund. For this Edmund granted 
to Thomas in exchange for the manor of Bleburgh, the manor of Any 
in Ireland without any retainment. To have and to hold to Thomas 
and his heirs of the King and his heirs by the services which belong to 
that manor, for ever. Be it known that John de Lovetot testified before 
the Justices, his associates, that the King ordered him to let this fine 
pass in the Bench without delay. (** Ei precepit quod finis iste sine 
dilacione transiret in Banco.") 

\Endorsed^ William Foliot and Isabella his wife put in their 
claim. 

7 Edward I. (1278-79). 

WILTS, DORSET. 

(78) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Robert 
de Wodeton, querent, and Robert, Bishop of Salisbury, deforciant, by 
Nicholas de Sancto Edwardo in his place, of the custody of Reginald 
son and heir of Reginald de Remmesbyr which belongs to the querent 
because Reginald de Remmesbyr held land of him by knights' 
service. Robert de Wodetone granted for himself and his heirs that 
the Bishop and his successors henceforth shall have the custody of the 
said Reginald and his heirs and of all his tenements which are of the 
fee of the said Bishop in county of Wilts and likewise the marriage of 
the same without hindrance of Robert de Wodeton or his heirs. For 
this the Bishop granted for himself and his successors that the querent 
and his heirs henceforth shall have the custody of all the tenements of 
Reginald and his heirs which are of the fee of Robert de Wodeton in 
county of Dorset without hindrance of the Bishop or his successors or 
their bailiffs, for ever. 

9 Edward L (1280-81). 

DORSET, IRELAND. 

(97) At Wynton', in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Roger Was- 
payl, querent, and John Mautravers, deforciant, of the manor of Wulle- 



Divers Counties, Edward /. 245 

cumbe Mautravers. Plea of covenant was summoned. John granted 
the manor to Roger. To have and to hold to Roger for life, of John 
and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one penny at Easter, and doing 
therefor such foreign service as belongs thereto, for all services, etc. 
John and his heirs will warrant the manor by the said services against 
all men to Roger for his life. After his death the manor wholly shall 
revert to John and his heirs quit of the heirs of Roger, for ever. For 
this Roger granted to John, the manor of Radghel and a messuage and 
land in Kylcolman, and a messuage and land in Lochkyl in county Ly- 
meryck in Ireland without any retainment. To have and to hold to 
John and his heirs of the chief lords of those fees by the services which 
belong to those tenements, for ever. This concord was made between 
them with the assent and by the wish of the King, agreeing thereto, 
provided the tenements are held in chief of him. 

10 Edward I. (1281-82). 

WILTS, SOMERSET, DORSET. 

(117) At Exeter, in the morrow of the Purification of the Blessed 
Mary, between Henry de Gouyz, querent, and Brian de Gouyz, senior, 
deforciant, of three carucates of land in Kurchel, Berewes, Breen, Burn- 
ham, Toulard, Fernham, Tarente and Stubhampton. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Brian acknowledged the tenements, namely whatever 
he already held in the vills aforesaid as in demesnes, services, advowsons 
of churches, etc., to be the right of Henry, as by his gift. To have and 
to hold to Henry and the heirs of his body of Brian during life, render- 
ing therefor yearly ten pounds sterling at Nativity of our Lord and 
Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of those fees for Brian, all other services which belong to 
those tenements. After the decease of Brian, Henry and his heirs shall 
be quit of the payment of ten pounds and shall hold the tenements of 
the heirs of Brian, for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity 
of St. John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of those fees for the heirs of Brian all other services which belong 
to the tenements. Should Henry die without heir of his body, his 
brother Brian de Gouyz, junior, surviving, the tenements wholly shall 
remain to Brian junior and the heirs of his body. To hold of Brian 
senior, for his life, and after the death of Brian senior, of his heirs, by 
the said services, for ever. Should Brian junior die without heir of his 
body, his brother John surviving, the tenements wholly shall remain to 
John and the heirs of his body. To hold as aforesaid. Should John die 
without heir of his body, his brother Nicholas surviving, the tenements 
wholly shall remain to Nicholas and the heirs of his body. To hold as 



246 Dorset Fines, 



aforesaid. Should Nicholas die without heir of his body, his brother 
Roger surviving, the tenements wholly shall remain to Roger and the 
heirs of his body. To hold as aforesaid. Moreover Brian senior 
granted for himself and his heirs that the tenement which Cassandra, 
who was the wife of Thomas de Kayleway, held of Brian senior, in 
Toulard, for term of her life, and which after her death ought to revert 
to him and his heirs, should wholly remain to Henry and his heirs ; or 
to Brian junior and his heirs, if Henry died without heir of his body ; or 
to John and his heirs, if Brian junior died without heir of his body ; 
or to Nicholas and his heirs, if John died without heir of his body ; or to 
Roger and his heirs, if Nicholas died without heir of his body. To hold, 
together with the tenements aforesaid, as is aforesaid for ever. Brian 
senior and his heirs will warrant to Henry and the heirs of his body ; or 
to Brian junior, if Henry died without heir of his body, or to John, 
Nicholas or Roger in like manner as is aforesaid. Should Henry, Brian 
junior, John, Nicholas and Roger die without heirs of their bodies the 
tenements wholly shall revert to Brian senior and his heirs quit, for 
ever. For this Henry gave to Brian senior, one sore goshawk. This 
concord was made Cassandra being present and acknowledging that she 
had no claim in the tenement she holds as is aforesaid except for term 
of her life. 

[Endorsed,] Margareta de Gouyz, Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Glou- 
cester and Hertford, and Robert de Lucy put in their claims. 

II Edward I. (1282-83). 

SOMERSET, DORSET, DEVON, BERKS, OXFORD, WILTS. 

(128) At Salop, three weeks after Easter day, between John son and 
heir of John de Maundevile, querent, and Simon de Monte Alto and 
Clemencia his wife, for this matter : the querent complained that Simon 
and Clemencia hold more than they should, in dower of Clemencia, of 
free tenement which was of John de Maundevill once her husband, in 
Estkoker. Simon and Clemencia acknowledged the tenement, namely, 
the manor of Estkoker and advowson of the church and the hundred 
belonging to the manor to be the right of the querent, and remitted the 
same to him and his heirs for ever. Moreover Simon and Clemencia 
remitted to the querent and his heirs their right by name of dower in all 
other lands and tenements which were of John once husband of 
Clemencia in the counties of Somerset, Dorset, Devon, Berks and 
Oxford, for ever. Saving to Simon and Clemencia for the life of 
Clemencia all knights' fees in the same counties with which she was 
endowed before this concord was made. For this the querent granted to 
Simon and Clemencia the manor of Sutton Maundevile in county of 



Divers Counties, Edward L 247 

Wilts and advowson of the church. Moreover he granted to them, one 
hundred and three shillings and fourpence of yearly rent in his manor of 
Merswode in county of Dorset, to be taken by them yearly at his hands 
or the hands of his heirs, or at the hands of all others who shall hold 
that manor during the lives of Simon and Clemencia, at Michaelmas and 
Easter. And Simon and Clemencia may distrain on the chattels found 
in that manor for the rent if unpaid. To have and to hold to Simon 
and Clemencia during their lives of the querent and his heirs, rendering 
therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, 
etc, and doing therefor to the chief lords of those fees for John and his 
heirs all other services which belong to the manor of Sutton. John and 
his heirs will warrant to Simon and Clemencia for their lives, the tene- 
ments which remain to them by this fine. After their deaths, the 
querent and his heirs shall be quit of the payment of the aforesaid 
money and the tenements shall wholly revert to him and his heirs quit 
of the heirs of Simon and Clemencia, for ever. This concord, was made 
between them, saving to Simon and Clemencia the right which 
Clemencia had in the manor of Sootewelle in county of Berks if they 
wished therein to implead. Be it known that John granted for himself 
and his heirs that they will acquit Simon and Clemencia of all services 
to the King and others which were in arrear in respect of the manor of 
Sutton before this concord was made. 

12 Edward I. (1283-84). 

CORNWALL, DORSET. 

(135) At Launceueton', five weeks after Easter day, between Nicholas 
de Croket, querent, and Humphrey de Bello Campo and Sibilla his 
wife, impedients, of the manors of Lennestek' and Laulowar. Plea of 
warranty of deed was summoned. The impedients acknowledged the 
manors to be the right of Nicholas, as by their gift. For this he gave 
the manors to them. To have and to hold to Humphrey and Sibilla 
and the heirs they should beget, of the chief lords of those fees by the 
services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Should Humphrey 
die without heir by Sibilla, she surviving, the manors wholly will remain 
to her and her heirs quit of the other heirs of Humphrey. To hold of 
the chief lords of those fees by the services aforesaid, for ever. Should 
Sibilla die without heir by Humphrey, he surviving, then the manors 
wholly will remain to Humphrey and his heirs quit of the other heirs of 
Sibilla. To hold of the chief lords of those fees by the services afore- 
said, for ever. Moreover Humphrey and Sibilla granted for themselves 
and their heirs that henceforth they will render every year to William de 
Wilburgham and Emma his wife, during Emma's life, for a third part 



248 Dorset Fines, 



of the said manors which in any way concerned Emma by name of 
dower, eight marcs of silver to be taken in Humphrey and Sibilla's 
manor of Ryme in county Dorset. After the death of Emma, Humphrey 
and Sibilla and their heirs shall be quit of such payment, for ever. 
This concord was made there being present William and Emma who 
agreed thereto and likewise acknowledged themselves to have remitted 
to Humphrey and Sibilla and their heirs all the right and claim which 
they had in the third part aforesaid by name of dower, for ever. 

BERKS, DORSET. 

(140) At Radyng, in the morrow of Souls, between Nicholas de la 
Mare, querent, and John Gereberd, deforciant, of a messuage and land 
in Borewardescote. Plea of covenant was summoned. Nicholas ac- 
knowledged the tenement to be the right of John. For this he granted 
it to Nicholas and Margery his wife and rendered it to them. To have 
and to hold to Nicholas and Margery and the heirs of Nicholas, of the 
chief lords of those fees by the services which belong to the tenement, 
for ever. Nicholas granted to John and Alice his wife a messuage and 
land in Tarente Gundevyll in county Dorset To have and to hold to 
John and Alice during their lives, of Nicholas and his heirs, rendering 
therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, 
etc., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Nicholas and 
his heirs all other services which belong to that tenement. Nicholas 
and his heirs will warrant to John and Alice during their lives, the 
tenement which remains to them by this fine by the said services 
against all men, and after their deaths the same tenement wholly shall 
revert to Nicholas and his heirs quit of the heirs of both John and Alice, 
for ever. 

[Endorsed.] William Gereberd and Gilbert de Clare, Earl of 
Gloucester and Hertford put in their claim. 

13 Edward I. (1284-85). 

DORSET, SOMERSET. 

(145) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between John 
Le Deneys, querent, and Adam Le Deneys, impedient, of one messuage, 
four carucates of land and six marcs of rent in Wrokeshale Deneys and 
Kentecumbe and advowson of the church of Wrokeshale in county of 
Dorset, and one messuage, one carucate of land and six marks of rent 
in Sevenhamton Deneys and Thornok' in county of Somerset. Plea 
of warranty of deed was summoned. Adam acknowledged the tenement 
and advowson to be the right of John as by his gift. For this he p^ranted 
them to Adam. To have and to hpld to Adam during his life, of John 



Divers Counties, Edward /. 249 

and the heirs of his body, rendering therefor yearly one pair of gilt spurs 
or six pence at Easter for all service, etc. John and his heirs will war- 
rant the same to Adam during his life, by the said services against all 
men. After his death they shall wholly revert to John and his heirs 
quit of the heirs of Adam. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Should John die 
without heir of his body, then the tenements wholly shall remain to 
Simon his brother and his heirs. To hold of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

15 Edward I. (1286-87). 

SOMERSET, DORSET. 

(187) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Michael, 
between Ralph de Gorges, querent, and Elena de Gorges, deforciant, of 
the manors of Wrokeshale and Dunkerton. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Elena acknowledged the manors to be the right of Ralph. For 
this he granted them to her together with the manor of Ludynton in 
county of Dorset To have and to hold to Elena for life, of Ralph and 
his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John 
Baptist for all service, etc. Ralph and his heirs will warrant the manors 
to Elena for her life by the said services against all men. After her 
death they shall revert wholly to Ralph and his heirs for ever quit of 
the heirs of Elena. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to them, for ever. 

18 Edward I. (1289-90). 

DORSET, SOMERSET. 

(207) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between 
Mathew de Furnellis, plaintiff, and Simon de Monte Acuto, tenent of 
the manor of Cheddeseic in county of Somerset. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Mathew acknowledged the manor to be the right of Simon 
and remitted the same for himself and his heirs to Simon and his heirs, 
for ever, together with his right in all his lands and tenements in 
England on the day this concord was made. For this Simon granted 
to Mathew for life, the manor of Swere in county of Dorset and advow- 
son of the chapel of that manor, except the lands and tenements which 
Walter de Ralegh and Joan his wife hold in dower of Joan in the said 
manor, and except the hommage and service of John de La Tur and 
his heirs in respect of the whole tenement which they hold of Simon in 
Berewyk within the manor of Swere. Simon also granted for himself 
and his heirs to Mathew for life, twentv librates of rent to be taken 

16* 



250 Dorset Fines. 



yearly of the Abbot of Bynedon and his successors at the terms of St. 
Thomas the Apostle, Palm Sunday, Nativity of St. John Baptist and 
St. Giles, which rent Simon previously was accustomed to take from 
the Abbot in respect of one messuage and two carucates of land which 
the Abbot held of Simon in the manor of Westlullesworth. Simon also 
granted for himself and his heirs to Mathew twenty librates of rent to 
be taken yearly of the Prior of Christ's Church of Tuynham and his 
successors at the terms of Nativity of our Lord, Easter, Nativity of St. 
John Baptist and St. Michael, which rent Simon previously was ac- 
customed to take from the Prior in respect of one messuage and two 
carucates of land and the hundred of the manor of Pydelton which the 
Prior held of Simon. To have and to hold to Mathew for life, of Simon 
and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at feast of the Nativity 
of St. John Baptist for all service, etc. Simon and his heirs will warrant 
the tenements to Mathew for life against all men. After his death the 
tenements and rents wholly will revert to Simon and his heirs quit of 
the heirs of Mathew. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong thereto for ever. Simon remitted for himself 
and his heirs all right in the lands and tenements of Mathew in Eng- 
land on the day this concord was made for ever. This concord was 
made there being present the Abbot and Prior who agreed thereto and 
did fealty to Mathew at the Court, and it was made by precept of the 
King. 



27 Edward I. (1298-99). 

DORSET, DEVON. 

(245) At York, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Juliana who 
was the wife of Ralph de Wylinton, querent, and Edmund de Wylinton 
and Cristiana his wife, impedients, of the manor of Knyghton in county 
of Dorset, and the manor of Rydelcumbe in county of Devon, which 
manors Robert de Pudele and Margery his wife hold in dower of Mar- 
gery. Plea of covenant was summoned. Edmund and Cristiana ac- 
knowledged the manors to be the right of Juliana, and granted for them- 
selves and the heirs of Cristiana that the manors which Robert and 
Margery held in dower of Margery of the inheritance of Cristiana in the 
said vills on the day this concord was made, and which after the decease 
of Margerj' ought to revert to Edmund and Cristiana, should then wholly 
remain to Juliana and her heirs. To hold of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to those manors. This concord was made 
there being present Robert and Margery who agreed thereto and did 
fealty to Juliana at the court. 



Divers Counties^ Edward L 251 

30 Edward I. {1301-2). 

WILTS, DORSET. 

(268) At York, in the octaves of St John Baptist, between Henry 
de La Box and Joan his wife, querents, and Everard du Brok', chaplain, 
deforciant, of one messuage, one carucate of land, four acres of meadow, 
two acres of wood and twenty shillings of rent in Beynton in county of 
Wilts, and a moiety of the manor of Chykerel in county of Dorset. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Everard acknowledged the tene- 
ments to be the right of Henry and rendered them to Henry and Joan 
at the court. To have and to hold to Henry and Joan and the heirs of 
Henry of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
tenements, for ever. Moreover Everard granted for himself and his 
heirs that they would warrant the tenements to Henry and Joan and 
the heirs of Henry as is aforesaid against all men, for ever. For this 
Henry and Joan gave to Everard one hundred pounds sterling. 

DORSET, SOMERSET, DEVON. 

(269) At York, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between Robert 
son of Robert Fitz Payn and Isabella his wife, querents, by John de 
Middelton in their place, and Robert son of Robert de Wodeton, defor- 
&lt;:iant, by Richard Larke in his place, of the manor of Wodeton and ad- 
vowson of the church of that manor and one carucate, one ferling and 
three and a half virgates of land, twenty-two acres of meadow, five and 
a half acres of wood, seventy shillings and seven pence of rent in Wyte- 
churche, Symundesburgh, Lodres and Maugerton in county of Dorset, 
and other property in Counties of Somerset and Devon. Plea of cove- 
nant was summoned. The deforciant acknowledged the tenements and 
advowsons, that is to say, whatever he had in the said vills as in de- 
mesne and service on the day this concord was made without any re- 
tainment to be the right of Robert son of Robert Fitz Payn as that which 
he and Isabella had by his gift. ' To have and to hold to Robert and 
Isabella and the heirs of Robert of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which" belong to those tenements and advowsons, for ever. 
Moreover the deforciant granted for himself and his heirs that they will 
warrant the tenements and advowsons to Robert and Isabella and the 
heirs of Robert as is aforesaid against all men for ever. For this Robert 
and Isabella gave to Robert son of Robert de Wodeton two hundred 
pounds sterling. 

33 Edward L (1304-05). 

DORSET, SOMERSET. 

(301) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary. Between Robert son of Pagan and Isabella his wife, 



252 Dorset Fines. 



querents, by John de Middelton in Robert's place, and Adam Le Deneys, 
deforciant, by William Mody in his place, of the manor of Wroxhale 
and advowson of the church, and one messuage and one carucate of 
land in Kemlecumbe in co. Dorset, and land in Sevenhampton Deneys, 
Meriet and Turnok in co. Somerset. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Adam acknowledged the tenements and advowson to be the right of 
Robert, as those which he and Isabella had by his gift. For this they 
granted the same tenements and advowson to Adam and rendered the 
same at the court. To have and to hold to Adam during his life, of 
Robert and Isabella and the heirs of Robert, rendering therefor yearly 
one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, etc., and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Robert and Isabella and the 
heirs of Robert all other services which belong to the tenements and 
advowson. After the death of Adam the tenements and advowson 
wholly shall revert to Robert and Isabella and the heirs of Robert quit 
of the heirs of Adam. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the tenements and advowson for ever. 

[Endorsed.] Robert de Whytefeld put in his claim. 

(304) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord. 
Between Elias, parson of the church of Cameleghe, querent, and Stephen 
de Bello Monte and Joan his wife, deforciants, of the manor of West 
baggeburgh and one messuage one carucate of land and eight marcs of 
rent in Overestaweye, Ayly, Ashholte and Spaxton and a moiety of the 
manor of Wynford in co. Somerset, and a moiety of the manor of 
Haselbere juxta Stokewak in co. Dorset. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. The deforciants acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Elias and rendered the same to him at the court. To have and to hold 
to Elias and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. Moreover they granted for them- 
selves and the heirs of Joan that they would warrant the same to Elias 
and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this Elias gave to the de- 
forciants one hundred pounds sterling. 

[Endorsed,] Robert son of Robert de Akton put in his claim. 



I Edward II. (1307-8). 

(i) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist 35 Edward I. 
and afterwards recorded fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary i Ed- 
ward II., between Stephen Godwyne de Warham and Cristina his wife, 
querents, and John Tilly de Westharptre, deforciant, of 4 marcs of rent 
in Magna Crauford. Plea of covenant was summoned in the court of 
Edward I. John acknowledged the rent to be the right of Stephen, as 
that which he and Cristina had by his gift. To have and to hold to 
Stephen and Cristina and the heirs of Stephen of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to that rent, for ever. Moreover he 
g^ranted for himself and his heirs that i messuage and a moiety of i 
carucate of land which Adam de Harcleye held for term of life of his 
(the deforciant's) inheritance in the said vill on the day this concord 
was made, and which, after Adam's death ought to revert to him and 
his heirs, should then wholly remain to Stephen and Cristina and the 
heirs of Stephen. To hold together with the rent of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to the tenements for ever. John 
and his heirs will warrant the tenements to Stephen and Cristina and 
the heirs of Stephen against all men, for ever. For this Stephen and 
Cristina gave to John 40 pounds sterling. This concord was made 
Adam being present who agreed thereto and did fealty to Stephen and 
Cristina in the court of Edward II. 

(3) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between William Russel, querent, and Nicholas de 
Morteshom and Nichola his wife, deforciants, of the manor of Athe- 
lyngeton juxta Brudeport. Plea of covenant was summoned. The 
deforciants acknowledged the manor to be the right of William as 
by their gift. For this, William granted it to them, and rendered 
it at the court. To have and to hold to Nicholas and Nichola during 
their lives, of William and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one 
penny at Easter for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for William and his heirs all other services which 
belong to the manor. After the deaths of Nicholas and Nichola 
the manor wholly shall revert to William and his heirs quit of the 
heirs of Nicholas and Nichola. To hold of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to the manor for ever. 

(4) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity 35 Edward I., 
and afterwards recorded three weeks after Easter i Edward II., between 
William Le Mareschal de Dorcestr', querent, and Nicholas de Blake- 
more and Dionisia his wife, deforciants, of i messuage in Dorcestr'. 

17 



254 Dorset Fines, 



Plea of covenant was summoned between them in the court of Ed- 
ward I. The deforciants acknowledged the messuage to be the right of 
William and rendered it at the court. To have and to hold to William 
and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the messuage, for ever. Moreover they granted for themselves and 
the heirs of Dionisia that they would warrant the messuage to William 
and his heirs against all men for ever. For this, William gave to 
Nicholas and Dionisia loo shillings of silver. 

(5) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity 35 Edward I., 
and afterwards recorded three weeks after Easter day i Edward II., 
between William le Mareschal de Dorcestre, querent, and Ralph Barun 
and Cecilia his wife, deforciants, of i messuage and i virgate of land 
in Whitcherche. Plea of covenant was summoned in the court of 
Edward I. The deforciants acknowledge the tenements to be the right 
of William and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to 
William and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. Moreover they granted for them- 
selves and the heirs of Cecilia that they would warrant the tenements 
to William and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this William 
gave to Ralph and Cecilia 20 pounds sterling. 

(6) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist 
35 Edward I., and afterwards recorded fifteen days after the day of St. 
Hilary i Edward II., between Robert son of Robert Fiz Johan of 
Warham and Alice his wife, querents, and John Kyng of Berewyk, 
deforciant, of i messuage, 6 bovates of land and 6 shillings of rent 
in Stocle juxta Kyngesbere. Plea of covenant was summoned in the 
court of Edward I. Robert acknowledged the tenements to be the right 
of John as by his gift. For this John granted to Robert and Alice the 
said tenements and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold 
to Robert and Alice and the heirs they should beget, of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 
Should Robert die without heir by Alice, then after the deaths of both 
Robert and Alice the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs 
of Robert, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. 

(7) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
35 Edward I., and afterwards recorded fifteen days after the day of 
St. Hilary i Edward II., between Henry de Gussiche and Isabella his 
wife, querents, and John Polayn, deforciant, of a messuage and land in 
Gussiche St. Michael's. Plea of covenant was summoned in the court 
of Edward I. Henry acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
John as by his gift. For this John granted them to Henry and Isabella 
and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Henry and 



I Edward II. (1307-8). 255 



Isabella and the heirs they should beget, of the chief lords of that fee, 
by the services which belong to the tenements, for ever. Should Henry 
die without heir by Isabella, then after the deaths of Henry and Isabella 
the tenements wholly shall remain to Henry son of the said Henry de 
Gussiche and the heirs of his body, to hold of the chief lords of that fee 
by. the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Should 
Henry son of Henry die without heir of his body then the tenements 
wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Henry de Gussiche. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements, for ever. 

(8) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. John Baptist 35 Edward 
I., and afterwards recorded fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary 
I Edward II., between William Selewode and Alice his wife, querents, 
and William le Sauser and Idonia his wife, deforciants, of a fifth part of 
I messuage and 6 bovates of land in Sheftebury. Plea of covenant was 
summoned between them in the court of Edward I. The deforciants 
acknowledged the fifth part to be the right of William Selewode and 
rendered the same to William and Alice at the court. To have and to 
hold to William and Alice and the heirs of William, of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to the fifth part, for ever. More- 
over they granted for themselves and the heirs of Idonia that they 
would warrant the fifth part to William and Alice and the heirs of 
William against all men, for ever. For this William and Alice gave 
to William and Idonia 20 pounds sterling. 

(9) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between John de 
Tynten junior, querent, and Alice Rosel, deforciant, of the manor of 
Coleweye. Plea of covenant was summoned. John junior acknow- 
ledged the manor to be the right of Alice, who, for this, granted it to 
John junior, and rendered the same at the court. To have and to hold 
to John junior, and the heirs of his body, of Alice and her heirs for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all 
services, &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Alice 
and her heirs all other services which belong to that manor. Should 
John junior die without heir of his body, then the manor wholly will 
remain to John the middle brother of John junior (** Johanni mediocri 
fratri predicti Johannis Junioris") and the heirs of his body, to hold of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that manor, 
for ever. Should John the middle brother die without heir of his body, 
then the manor wholly shall revert to Alice and her heirs quit of the 
heirs of the aforesaid John and John. To hold of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to that manor, for ever. 

[Endorsed,] John de Tynteyn son and heir of John de Tynteyn and 
Roysia Russel put in their claim. 



256 Dorset Fines. 



John Russel senior, son of Alice Russel puts in his claim. 

(10) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity 35 Edward I., 
and afterwards recorded three weeks after Easter day i Edward IL, 
between William le Mareschal de Dorcestr', querent, and William de 
Tril and Joan his wife, deforciants, of a messuage and land in Whit- 
cherche. Plea of covenant was summoned in the court of Edward I. 
The deforciants acknowledged the tenements to be the right of William 
le Mareschal and rendered the same at the. court. To have and to hold 
to William le Mareschal and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to the tenements, for ever. Moreover they 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Joan that they would warrant 
the tenements to William le Mareschal and his heirs against all men, 
for ever. For this William le Mareschal gave to William and Joan 10 
pounds sterling. 

(11) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between Ha- 
wysia de Kaynes, querent, and William de Kaynes, deforciant, of i 
messuage, 2 carucates of land, 10 acres of meadow, 60 acres of wood 
and 50 shillings of rent in Cumbekaynes. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Hawisia acknowledged the tenements to be the right of William 
as by her gift. For this he granted them to her and rendered them at 
the court. To have and to hold to Hawisia during her life, of William 
and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John 
Baptist for all service, &amp;c, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that 
fee for William and his heirs all other services which belong to the 
tenements. After the decease of Hawysia the tenements wholly will 
revert to William and his heirs quit of the heirs of Hawysia. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tene- 
ments, for ever. 

[Endorsed,] Robert de Keynes put in his claim. 

(12) At Westminster, three weeks after Easter day, between Henry 
de Haddon and Alianora his wife, querents, and Thomas de Marleberge, 
deforciant, of the manor of Caundel Haddon and i messuage, i carucate 
of land in Stapelbrigge. Plea of covenant was summoned. Henry 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Thomas as by his gift. 
For this Thomas granted them to Henry and Alianora, and rendered 
them at the court. To have and to hold to Henry and Alianora and 
the heirs which they beget, of the chief lords of that fee, by the services 
which belong to those tenements, for ever. Should Henry die without 
heir by Alianora, then after the deaths of both Henry and Alianora the 
tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Henry. To hold of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements, 
for ever. 

(13) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 



2 Edward II. (1308-9) 257 

John Aucher, querent, and Richard de Wylton, deforciant, of a messuage 
and land in Ocfordelocky. Plea of covenant was summoned. Richard 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John, as by his gift. For 
this John granted them to Richard and rendered them at the court. To 
have and to hold to Richard during his life, of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to the tenements, for ever. After his 
death the tenements wholly shall remain to Walter de VVylton and 
Isabella his wife, to hold during their lives of the chief lords by the 
services which belong to the tenements. After their deaths the tene- 
ments wholly shall remain to Ralph son of the said Walter, to hold 
during his life, as aforesaid. After his death the tenements wholly 
shall remain to Roger, brother of Ralph and the heirs of his body 
begotten, to hold as aforesaid. Should Roger die without heir of his 
body, then the tenements wholly shall remain to James, brother of 
Roger and the heirs of his body begotten, to hold as aforesaid. Should 
James die without heir of his body, then the tenements wholly shall 
remain to the right heirs of Walter, to hold as aforesaid. 

(14) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Walter de Wylton and Isabella his wife, querents, and Richard de 
Wylton, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Kyngestrete, Marenhull. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. The querents acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of Richard as by their gift. For this he 
granted them to Walter and Isabella and rendered them at the court. 
To have and to hold to Walter and Isabella during their lives, of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements. 
After their deaths the tenements wholly shall remain to John son of 
Walter and the heirs of his body begotten, to have and to hold as afore- 
said. Should John die without heir of his body, then the tenements 
shall wholly remain to James, his brother, and the heirs of his body, to 
hold as aforesaid. Should James die without heir of his body, then the 
tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Walter, to hold as 
aforesaid. 

2 Edward II. (1308-9). 

(2) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Henry 
Shirard and Alice his wife, querents, and Stephen Prowet, deforciant, 
of 2 messuages, 2 carucates of land, 33s. 4d. of rent in Wermewell, 
Lyteie Mayne and Waldich and advowson of chapel of Lytele Mayne. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Henry acknowledged the tenements 
and advowson to be the right of Stephen, as by his gift. For this he 
granted them to Henry and Alice and rendered them at the court. 
To have and to hold to Henry and Alice during their lives, of 



258 Dorset Fines. 



Stephen and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity 
of St. John Baptist for all service, &amp;c., and doing therefor to the 
chief lords of that fee for Stephen and his heirs all other services 
which belong to the tenements and advowson. After the deaths of 
Henry and Alice the property wholly shall remain to Henry son of the 
said Henry and Albreda his wife and the heirs of the body of Henry 
son of Henry, to hold of Stephen and his heirs by the said services for 
ever. Should Henry son of Henry die without heir of his body, then 
after the deaths of Henry son of Henry and Albreda the property wholly 
shall remain to Stephen Shirard and the heirs of his body, to hold as 
aforesaid. Should Stephen Shirard die without heir of his body, then 
the property wholly shall remain to William Prowet and the heirs of 
his body, to hold as aforesaid. Should William die without heirs of his 
body, then the property wholly shall revert to Stephen Prowet and his 
heirs quit of the heirs of Henry and Alice and also of the other heirs of 
Henry son of Henry, Albreda, Stephen Shirard and William. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tene- 
ments and advowson, for ever. 

(15) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Michael, 
between Ralph de Gorges and Alianora his wife, querents, and William 
de Caleshale, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Sturministr* Mare- 
schal. Plea of covenant was summoned. William acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of Ralph, as those which Ralph and Alianora 
have by his gift. To have and to hold to Ralph and Alianora and the 
heirs of Ralph of the King and his heirs, for ever. Moreover William 
granted for himself and his heirs that they would warrant the tenements 
to Ralph and Alianora and the heirs of Ralph against all men, for ever. 
For this Ralph and Alianora gave to William 100 pounds sterling. This 
concord was made by precept of the King. 

(16) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between Bartholomew de Otery and Juliana his wife, querents, and 
John Engel, impedient, of i messuage, 16 acres of land, 4 acres of 
meadow and 12s. of rent in Shireburn. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned. John acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Bartholomew, and rendered the same to Bartholomew and Juliana at 
the court. To have and to hold to Bartholomew and Juliana and the 
heirs of Bartholomew of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. For this Bartholomew and Juliana 
gave to John 10 marcs of silver. 

(17) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Henr&gt;' 
Gileberd and Alice his wife, querents, and John Scot of Portlond, im- 
pedient, of a messuage and land in Kyngeswyk'. Plea .of warranty of 
deed was summoned. John acknowledged the tenements to be the right 



2 Edward II. (1308-9). 259 

of Henry, as those which Henry and Ahce had by his gift. To have 
and to hold to Henry and Alice and the heirs of Henry of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for 
ever. Moreover John granted for himself and his heirs that they would 
warrant the tenements to Henry and Alice and the heirs of Henry 
against all men, for ever. For this Henry and Alice gave to John 10 
pounds sterling. 

[Endorsed.'] John Fraunceys and Sabina his wife put in their claim. 

(18) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Robert de Stykelaue, querent, and Joan daughter of John 
Russel, impedient, of a messuage and land in Bere and Knyghton. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. Joan acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of Robert as by her gift. To have and to 
hold to Robert and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, for ever. Moreover she granted for 
herself and her heirs that they would warrant the tenements to Robert 
and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this Robert gave to Joan 
10 pounds sterling. 

(19) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Walter de Wylton and Isabella his wife, querents, and Richard 
de Wylton, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Todebere juxta 
Marenhull. Plea of covenant was summoned. Walter and Isabella 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Richard, as by their 
gift. For this Richard granted the tenements to them and rendered 
them at the court. To have and to hold to Walter and Isabella during 
their lives, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
the tenements, with remainder after their deaths to Roger son of the 
said Walter, io hold for his life of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the tenements, and remainder after the death 
of Roger to John his brother and the heirs of his body, to hold as 
aforesaid. Should John die without heir of his body, then the tenements 
wholly shall remain to James his brother and the heirs of his body, to 
hold as aforesaid. Should James die without heir of his body, then 
the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Walter, to 
hold as aforesaid. 

(20) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Joan who was the wife of Robert de Vfford and Thomas de Vfford and 
Eva, his wife, querents, and William parson of the church of Wykham, 
deforciant, of 5 messuages, 400 acres of land, 17J acres of meadow, 4 
acres of pasture, and 4s. of rent in Bradeford, Mukelford, Frome Craua- 
zoun, and Frome Whitefeld. Plea of covenant was summoned. Joan 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of William. For this he 
granted them to her and rendered them at the court. To have and to 



26o Dorset Fines, 



hold to Joan during her life, of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, with remainder after her death to 
Thomas and Eva and the heirs of Thomas, to hold as aforesaid. Should 
Thomas die without heir of his body, then after the deaths of both 
Thomas and Eva the tenements shall wholly remain to the right heirs 
of Joan. To hold as aforesaid. 

(21) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Roger le Gildene, querent, and John de la Tille and Isabella 
his wife, deforciants, of i messuage, 2 mills, 2 carucates of land, 5 
acres of meadow and 40s. of rent in Langeblaneford. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. John and Isabella acknowledged the tenements to be 
the right of Roger, as by their gift. For this he granted them to John 
and Isabella, and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to 
John and Isabella during their lives, of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to the tenements, with remainder after their 
deaths to Henry le Gildene and Elizabeth his wife and the heirs which 
they beget, to hold of the chief lords of that fee as aforesaid. Should 
Henry die without heir begotten of Elizabeth, then after the deaths of 
both Henry and Elizabeth the tenements wholly shall remain to the 
right heirs of Elizabeth. To hold as aforesaid. 

(22) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Henry le Gildene and Elizabeth his wife, querents, and John 
de la Tille and Isabella his wife, deforciants, of i messuage, 12 bovates 
of land, 6 acres of meadow, 30s. of rent in Radelyngtone juxta Corf- 
castel. Plea of covenant was summoned. Henry acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of John. For this, John and Isabella granted 
them to Henry and Elizabeth and rendered them at the court. To have 
and to hold to Henry and Elizabeth and the heirs which they beget, of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tene- 
ments, for ever. Should Henry die without heir by Elizabeth, then 
after the deaths of both Henry and Elizabeth the tenements wholly 
shall remain to the right heirs of Elizabeth. To hold as aforesaid. 

(23) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Alan de Shadewell and Laurencia his wife, querents, and Robert de 
Haddele, deforciant, of 7 messuages, 10 virgates of land, 6 acres of 
meadow in Gyssych St. Michael's. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Robert acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Alan, and 
rendered them to Alan and Laurencia at the court and remitted for 
himself and his heirs to Alan and Laurencia and the heirs of Alan, for 
ever. Moreover Robert granted for himself and his heirs that they 
would warrant the tenements to Alan and Laurencia against all men, 
for ever. For this Alan and Laurencia gave to Robert 100 marcs of 
silver. 



3 Edward II. (1309-10). 261 

(24) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Robert Martyn, querent, and Henry Tonere and Avicia his wife, de- 
forciants, of the manors of Pydele Tonere and Ermyngeswell and 
advowson of the chapel of Pydele Tonere. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Henry acknowledged the manors and advowson to be 
the right of Robert, as by his gift. For this, Robert granted them to 
Henry and Avicia and rendered them at the court. To have and to 
hold to Henry and Avicia and the heirs which they beget, of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the manors and 
advowson, for ever. Should Henry die without heir by Avicia, then 
after the deaths of both Henry and Avicia the manors and advowson 
wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Henry. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the manors and advow- 
son, for ever. . 

3 Edward II. (1309-10). 

(24A) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Thomas 
de Marleberge, querent, and John de Croxford and Eva his wife and 
John their son, impedients, of a messuage and land in Langeham juxta 
Gyllyngham. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. John, Eva 
and John acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Thomas, as 
by their gift. To have and to hold to Thomas and his heirs of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements, 
for ever. Moreover they granted for themselves and the heirs of John 
de Croxford that they would warrant the tenements to Thomas and his 
heirs against all men, for ever. For this Thomas gave to John, Eva 
and John 100 marcs of silver. 

(25) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Nicholas 
de Langerissh and Alice his wife, querents, and Nicholas de Hacche, 
clerk, deforciant, of i messuage, i acre of meadow and pasture for i 
plough beast (" affrum "), 3 oxen, i cow, 10 pigs and 60 sheep and a 
moiety* of land (** de medietate terre") in Littleton juxta Blaneford 
Martel. Plea of covenant was summoned. Nicholas de Langerissh 
acknowledged the property to be the right of Nicholas de Hacche as 
by his gift. For this Nicholas de Hacch' granted the property to 
Nicholas and Alice and rendered the same at the court: To have and 
to hold to Nicholas and Alice and the heirs of Nicholas de Langerissh, 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the property, 
for ever. 

(26) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. Martin, between Richard 

* The quantity of land seems to have been left out of the document by mistake. 



262 Dorset Fines, 



del Espine, querent, and John de Gauelbrigge, deforciant, of a messuage 
and land in West Corscumbe. Plea of covenant was summoned. John 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Richard, as by his gift. 
For this Richard granted them to John and rendered them at the court. 
To have and to hold to John during his life, of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to the tenements, with remainder after 
his death to Isabella his daughter and the heirs of her body. To hold 
of the chief lords of thit fee by the services which belong to the tene- 
ments, for ever. Should Isabella die without heir of her body, then 
the tenements wholly shall remain to Joan, sister of Isabella and the 
heirs of her body, to hold as aforesaid. Should Joan die without heir 
of her body, then the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs 
of John, quit of the other heirs of Isabella and Joan, to hold as aforesaid. 

(27) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between Robert de Maundevill and Isabella his wife, querents, and 
Walter de Wylton, deforciant, of i messuage, 2 carucates of land, 28J 
acres of meadow, 40 acres of wood, 49s. yd. of rent in Bukeresweston. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Walter acknowledged the tenements 
to be the right of Robert, and rendered them to Robert and Isabella at 
the court. To have and to hold to Robert and Isabella and the heirs 
which they beget, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. Should Robert die without heir by 
Isabella, then after the deaths of both Robert and Isabella the tenements 
wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Robert, to hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements, for 
ever. 

(28) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between William 
son of William de Estoke and Joan his wife, querents, and William de 
Dulre, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Byestewalle juxta Warham. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. William son of William acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of William de Dulre, as by his 
gift. For this William de Dulre granted the tenements to William son 
of William and Joan and rendered the same at the court. To have and 
to hold to William son of William and Joan and the heirs of William 
son of William of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the tenements, for ever. 

(29) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between William 
son of William de Estoke and Joan his wife, querents, and William de 
Dulre, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Chuping Blaneford. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. William son of William acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of William de Dulre, as by his gift. For 
this William de Dulre granted the tenements to William son of William 
and Joan and rendered the same to them at the court. To have and 



3 Edward II, (1309-10). 263 

to hold to William son of William and Joan and the heirs which they 
beget, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
tenements, for ever. Should William son of William die without heir 
by Joan, then after the deaths of both William son of William and 
Joan the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of William  
son of William, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(30) At Westminster, 3 weeks after Easter day, between Juliana 
who was the wife of Walter de Sturton, querent, and Robert son of 
Pagan and Isabella his wife, deforciant, of the manor of Frome Whyte- 
feld and advowson of the church. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Juliana acknowledged the manor and advowson to be the right of 
Robert. For this, Robert and Isabella granted them to Juliana and 
rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Juliana during her 
life, of Robert and Isabella and the heirs of Robert, rendering therefor 
yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, &amp;c., and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Robert and Isabella and 
the heirs of Robert all other services which belong to the manor and 
advowson. After the death of Juliana the manor and advowson wholly 
shall revert to Robert and Isabella and the heirs of Robert quit of the 
heirs of Juliana, to hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the manor and advowson, for ever. 

(31) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Geoffrey de Cottelegh and Isabella his wife, querents, and 
William de Stratton, vicar of the church of Cerdestoke, deforciant, of 
the manor of Cottelegh. Plea of covenant was summoned. Geoffrey 
acknowledged the manor to be the right of William as by his gift. For 
this William granted the manor to Geoffrey and Isabella and rendered 
the same at the court. To have and to hold to Geoffrey and Isabella 
and the heirs of GeofPrey of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to that manor, for ever. 

(32) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John son of John de Abyndon, querent, and Sarra de Suthbouewode, 
deforciant, of 4 messuages, 9 acres of meadow, i carucate and i J virgate 
of land, except 2 acres of land, in Suthbouewode. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Sarra acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
John, as by her gift. For this John granted to Sarra 3 messuages, i 
carucate and i virgate of land, 9 acres of meadow of the aforesaid tene- 
ments and rendered the same at the court. To have and to hold to 
Sarra during her life, of John and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly 
one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, &amp;c., and doing 
therefor to the chief lords of that fee for John and his heirs all other 
services which belong to the tenements. After the death of Sarra the 



264 Dorset Fines, 



tenements wholly shall revert to John and his heirs quit of the heirs of 
Sarra, to hold as aforesaid. 

(33) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Richard Le Bakere and Agnes his wife, querents, and Edward Bouyer 
and Alice his wife, deforciants, of a messuage in Brideport. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Edward and Alice acknowledged the mes&gt; 
suage to be the right of Richard, as that which he and Agnes had by 
their gift. To have and to hold to Richard and Agnes and the heirs of 
Richard of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong ta 
that messuage, for ever. Moreover Edward and Alice granted for 
themselves and the heirs of Alice that they would warrant the messuage 
to Richard and Agnes and the heirs of Richard against all men, for 
ever. For this Richard and Agnes gave to Edward and Alice 6 marcs 
of silver. 

4 Edward IL (1310-11). 

(34) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Robert 
de Pymore, querent, and Robert Snou and Joan his wife, deforciants, 
of 2 acres of land in Lodres juxta Pymore. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Robert and Joan acknowledged the land to be the right of 
Robert de Pymore as by their gift. To have and to hold to Robert de 
Pymore and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the land, for ever. Moreover Robert and Joan granted for 
themselves and the heirs of Joan that they would warrant the land ta 
Robert de Pymore and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this 
Robert de Pymore gave to Robert and Joan 100 shillings of silver. 

(35) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between William 
de Clavile and Matilda his wife, querents, and John Skillyng, deforciant,, 
of 2 messuages, 80 acres of land, i\ acre of meadow, in Langeton and 
Swanewych. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. William 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John, as by his gift. 
For this John granted them to William and Matilda and rendered them 
at the court. To have and to hold to William and Matilda and the 
heirs of William of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. 

(36) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, between 
Hugh le Despenser, querent, and Richard Darcy and Alice his wife,, 
deforciants, of the manor of Wynterburn Hutton. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Richard and Alice acknowledged the manor to be the 
right of Hugh and remitted it for themselves and the heirs of Alice to 
Hugh and his heirs, for ever. For this Hugh gave to Richard and 
Alice 100 pounds sterling. 



4 Edward II . (1310-11). 265 

(37) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between John de 
Haddon, parson of the church of Langeton, querent, and John Red, 
deforciant, of i messuage, 12 acres of land and pasture for 8 animals, 
I heifer, i foal, and 50 sheep in Worthe. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. John Red acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John 
de Haddon and rendered the same at the court. To have and to hold 
to John de Haddon and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the tenements, for ever. Moreover he granted 
for himself and his heirs that they would warrant the tenements to John 
de Haddon and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this John de 
Haddon gave to John Red 20 pounds sterling. 

(38) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between John 
de la Mare, querent, and Hugh le Dispenser, senior, deforciant, of the 
manor of Asshemere. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknow- 
ledged the manor to be the right of Hugh, as by his gift. For this 
Hugh granted it to John and rendered it at the court. To have and to 
hold to John during his life, of Hugh and his heirs, rendering therefor 
yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service &amp;c., and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Hugh and his heirs all 
other services which belong to that manor. Hugh and his heirs will 
warrant the manor to John during his life by the said services against 
all men. After the death of John the manor wholly shall revert to 
Hugh and his heirs quit of the heirs of John. To hold of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to that manor, for ever. 

[Endorsed.] Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford put 
in his claim. 

(39) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Roger 
Cosyn and Joan his wife, querents, and Joan daughter of John Dunston 
of Hurstenesheye, deforciant, of i messuage, ij carucate of land, 10 
acres of meadow, 10 acres of wood and 12 pence of rent in Brodewynde- 
sore. Plea of covenant was summoned. The deforciant acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of Roger, as those which Roger and Joan 
had of her gift. To have and to hold to Roger and Joan and the heirs 
of Roger, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
those tenements, for ever. Moreover she granted for herself and her 
heirs that they would warrant the tenements to Roger and Joan and 
the heirs of Roger against all men, for ever. For this Roger and Joan 
gave to the deforciant 20 pounds sterling. 

[Endorsed,] John son of Ivo de Pillisdone put in his claim. 

(40) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between John de 
Cherleton of London, mercer, querent, and Stephen son of John Dylron 
of Shaston and Paulina his wife, deforciants, of a messuage in Shaston. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. The deforciants acknowledged the 



266 Dorset Fines. 



messuage to be the right of John as by their gift. To have and to hold 
to John and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the messuage, for ever. Moreover they granted for themselves 
and the heirs of Paulina that they would warrant the messuage to John 
and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this John gave to Stephen 
and Paulina loo shillings of silver. 

(41) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between Henry 
de Abyndon and Margary his wife, querents, and Robert Byndenote, 
deforciant, of a messuage and land in Overkenilecumbe. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Henry acknowledged the tenement to be 
the right of Robert, as by his gift. For this Robert granted the same 
to Henry and Margary and rendered them at the court. To have and 
to hold to Henry and Margary and the heirs they beget, of the chief 
lords of that fee, by the services which belong to those tenements, for- 
ever. Should Henry die without heir by Margary, then after the 
deaths of Henry and Margary the tenements wholly shall remain to 
the right heirs of Henr}\ To hold as aforesaid. 

(42) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Richard de Weye and Maria his wife, querents, and Walter son of 
Walter de Cheyne, deforciant, of i messuage, 140 acres of land, 10 
acres of meadow and pasture for 3 oxen and 100 sheep in Weye Ha- 
mundevile. Plea of covenant was summoned. Richard acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of Walter, as by his gift. For this 
Walter granted the tenements to Richard and Maria and rendered them 
at the court. To have and to hold to Richard and Maria and the heirs 
they beget, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to those tenements for ever. Should Richard die without heir by 
Maria, then after the deaths of Richard and Maria the tenements 
wholly shall remain to Nicholas brother of Richard and the heirs of 
his body. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to those tenements, for ever. Should Nicholas die without 
heir of his body, then the tenements wholly shall remain to the right 
heirs of Richard. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(43) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between John de Derneford, querent, and Richard de Derneford, de- 
forciant, of 2 messuages and 2 carucates of land in Langeton and 
Wodewehide. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of Richard, as by his gift. For this 
Richard granted them to John and rendered them at the Court. To 
have and to hold to John during his life, of Richard and his heirs, 
rendering therefor yearly one rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist for 
all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for 



5 Edward II. (1311-12). 267 

Richard and his heirs all other services which belong to the tenements. 
After the death of John the tenements wholly shall revert to Richard 
and his heirs quit of the heirs of John. To hold of the chief lords by 
the services belonging to the tenements, for ever. 

5 Edward II. (1311-12). 

(44) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Robert 
de Ludeford and Alice his wife, and John the son of Robert, querents, 
and Alice de Ponsoud, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Childe- 
frome. Plea of covenant was summoned. Alice de Ponsoud acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of Robert, as those which he, 
Alice and John had of her gift. For this they granted the tenements 
to Alice de Ponsoud and rendered them to her at the court. To have 
and to hold to Alice de Ponsoud during her life, of Robert, Alice and 
John and the heirs of Robert, rendering therefor yearly a rose at 
Nativity of St John Baptist for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of that fee for Robert, Alice and John and the heirs of 
Robert all other services which belong to the tenements. After the 
decease of Alice de Ponsoud the tenements wholly shall revert to 
Robert, Alice and John and the heirs of Robert quit of the heirs of 
Alice de Ponsoud. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the tenements, for ever. 

[Endorsed.] John son of Ingelramus le Waleys and Margery de 
Boys put in their claim. 

(45) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Alan de Wyke, querent, and John Richeman de Shefton and 
Alice his wife, deforciants, of one toft in Shefton. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. John and Alice acknowledged the toft to be the right 
of Alan as by their gift. To have and to hold to Alan and his heirs 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the toft, 
for ever. Moreover they granted for themselves and the heirs of Alice 
that they would warrant the toft to Alan and his heirs against all men, 
tor ever. For this Alan gave to John and Alice 6 marcs of silver. 

(46) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between 
Richard Fyret and Matilda his wife, querents, by John de Middelton 
m place of Matilda, and John Gerneys of Middelton, deforciant, of a 
messuage and land in Upsidelingg. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Richard acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John as by his 
gift. For this, John granted them to Richard and Matilda and rendered 
them at the court. To have and to hold to Richard and Matilda and 
the heirs of Richard of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. 



268 Dorset Fines. 



(47) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Roger 
de Hynyngton and Joan his wife, querents, and John de Cormailles, 
deforciant, of the manor of Parva Hynyngton and advowson of the 
church. Plea of covenant was summoned. Roger acknowledged the 
manor and advowson to be the right of John, as by his gift. For this, 
John granted them to Roger and Joan and rendered them at the court. 
To have and to hold to Roger and Joan and the heirs which they beget, 
of the King and his heirs, for ever. Should Roger die without heir 
by Joan, then after the deaths of both Roger and Joan the manor and 
advowson wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Roger. To hold 
of the King and his heirs, for ever. This concord was made by precept 
of the King. 

(48) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, 
between Philip son of Elias and Margery his wife, querents, and John 
de Hineton and William le Feudor, deforciants, of a messuage, land, 
and 6s. 8d. of rent in Duddesbury. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Philip acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John, as those 
which John and William had by his gift. For this, John and William 
granted them to Philip and Margery and rendered them at the court. 
To have and to hold to Philip and Margery during their lives, of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements. 
After the deaths of Philip and Margery the tenements wholly shall 
remain to John their son. To hold of the chief lords, during his life, 
by the services which belong to the tenements. After the death of 
John the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Philip. 
To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
the tenements, for ever. 

(49) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilar}', be- 
tween Philippa Wake, querent, and Nicholas son of Robert Martyn, 
deforciant, of a messuage and land in Batecumbe and Meleburibubbe. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Philippa acknowledged the tene- 
ments to be the right of Nicholas. For this, he granted them to her 
and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Philippa 
during her life, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements. After the death of Philippa the tenements 
wholly shall remain to Robert Deverty and the heirs of his body. To 
hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
tenements, for ever. Should Robert die without heir of his body, then 
the tenements wholly shall remain to Joan the wife of Henry de 
Bouhon and the heirs of her body begotten. To hold of the chief lords 
as aforesaid. Should Joan die without heirs of her body, then the 
tenements wholly shall remain to John le Petit de Stokewak and his 
heirs. To hold as aforesaid. 



6 Edward II. (131 2-13). 269 



(50) At Westminster, in the octaves of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between John de Percy and Margery his wife, querents, 
and Robert de Percy, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Est . . . erham. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. John and Margery acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of Robert as by their gift. For this, 
Robert granted them to John and Margery, and rendered them at the 
court. To have and to hold to John and Margery and the heirs of 
Margery of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
the tenements, for ever. 

(51) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, 
between Henry son of William atte Crouche, querent, and William 
atte Crouche, deforciant, of i messuage i virgate of land and 4s. of 
rent in Abbodestok. Plea of covenant was summoned. Henry ac- 
knowledged the tenements to be the right of William as by his gift. 
For this, William granted them to Henry and rendered them at the 
court. To have and to hold to Henry and the heirs of his body of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, 
for ever. Should Henry die without heir of his body, then the tene- 
ments wholly shall remain to Nicholas, brother of Henry, and the 
heirs of his body, to hold as aforesaid. Should Nicholas die without 
heir of his body, then the tenements wholly shall remain to Stephen, 
brother of Nicholas, and the heirs of his body, to hold as aforesaid. 
Should Stephen die without heir of his body, then the tenements 
wholly shall remain to Felicia sister of Stephen and the heirs of her 
body, to hold as aforesaid. Should Felicia die without heir of her 
body, then the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of the 
aforesaid William, to hold as aforesaid. 

6 Edward II. (1312-13). 

(52) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between John 
de Gary and Cristina his wife, querents, by Walter de Cumpton in their 
place, and Nicholas de Carevill and Mabilia his wife, deforciants, of a 
messuage and land in Mershwode. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
The deforciants acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John, 
as those which he and Cristina had by their gift. To have and to hold 
to John and Cristina and the heirs of John of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Moreover 
Nicholas and Mabilia granted for themselves and the heirs of Mabilia, 
that they would warrant the tenements to John and Cristina and the 
heirs of John against all men, for ever. For this John and Cristina 
gave to Nicholas and Mabilia 100 shillings of silver. 

(53) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Thomas 

18 



270 Dorset Fines, 



Le Dune and Leticia his wife, querents, and Henry de Cerne, clerk, 
deforciant, of 2 messuages 2 carucates of land and 40s. of rent in 
Wightoneton and Risshton. Plea of covenant was summoned. Thomas 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Henry, as by his gift. 
For this, Henry granted them to Thomas and Leticia and rendered 
them at the court. To have and to hold to Thomas and Leticia and 
the heirs which they beget, of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, for ever. Should Thomas die without 
heir begotten of Leticia, then after the deaths of both Thomas and 
Leticia the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Leticia. 
To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
those tenements, for ever. 

(54) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Reymund 
Harang, querent, and Thomas Dureye and Alice his wife, impedients, 
of a messuage and land in Portesham. Plea of warranty of deed was 
summoned. Thomas and Alice acknowledged the tenements to be the 
right of Reymund, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Reymund 
and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to those tenements, for ever. Moreover Thomas and Alice granted for 
themselves and the heirs of Alice, that they would warrant the tene- 
ments to Reymund and his heirs against all men for ever. For this 
Reymund gave to Thomas and Alice 100 shillings of silver. 

(55) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between Mathew 
de Buketon, querent, and William de Chenereston and Emma his wife, 
deforciants, of i messuage, 2 carucates of land, 20 acres of meadow, 
40 acres of pasture and 60s. of rent in Shipton juxta Bridiport Plea 
of covenant was summoned. William and Emma acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of Mathew, as by their gift. For this, 
Mathew granted them to William and Emma, and rendered them at 
the court. To have and to hold to William and Emma during their 
lives, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements. After their deaths the tenements wholly shall remain to 
John, son of the aforesaid Emma and his heirs. To hold of the chief 
lords as aforesaid. 

(56) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Richard Mauley and Joan his wife, querents, and Nicholas de Blake- 
more and Dionisia his wife, impedients, of a messuage in Dorcestre. 
Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. Nicholas and Dionisia 
acknowledged the messuage to be the right of Richard, as that which 
he and Joan had by their gift. To have and to hold to Richard and 
Joan and the heirs of Richard of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to that messuage, for ever. Moreover they 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Dionisia that they would 



7 Edward I L (1313-14). 271 

warrant the messuage to Richard and Joan and the heirs of Richard 
against all men, for ever. For this Richard and Joan gave to Nicholas 
and Dionisia one soar sparrow-hawk. 

(57) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Bar- 
tholomew Payn and Matilda his wife, querents, by John Payn in place 
of Matilda, and Thomas Daunvers and Agnes his wife, deforciants, 
of a messuage, land and 5s. gd. of rent, and a rent of a pound and a 
half and a moiety of a fourth part of a pound of pepper in Stoure 
Ereschus, which Roger Spurnehare holds for term of his life. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Thomas and Agnes acknowledged the tene- 
ments to be the right of Bartholomew and granted for themselves and 
the heirs of Agnes that the said tenements which Roger held for term 
of life of the inheritance of Agnes in the said vill on the day this con- 
cord was made, and which after the decease of Roger ought to revert 
to Thomas and Agnes and the heirs of Agnes, should then wholly 
remain to Bartholomew and Matilda and the heirs of Bartholomew, to 
hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements, for ever. Moreover Thomas and Agnes and the heirs of 
Agnes will warrant the tenements as is aforesaid to Bartholomew and 
Matilda and the heirs of Bartholomew, against all men, for ever. For 
this Bartholomew and Matilda gave to Thomas and Agnes one soar 
sparrow hawk. This concord was made there being present the afore- 
said Roger who acknowledged that he had nothing in the tenements 
except for term of life, and rendered them to Bartholomew and Matilda 
at the court. 

(58) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. John Baptist, between 
Hugh Eleyne, querent, and John Rycheman and Alice his wife, de- 
forciants, of a shop in Shafton. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
John and Alice acknowledged the shop to be the right of Hugh, as by 
their gift To have and to hold to Hugh and his heirs of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to that shop, for ever. 
Moreover John and Alice granted for themselves and the heirs of Alice 
that they would warrant the shop to Hugh and his heirs against all 
men, for ever. For this Hugh gave to John and Alice one soar sparrow 
hawk. 

[Endorsed.] John son of John Richeman put in his claim. 

7 Edward II. (1313-14). 

(59) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between Henry Fryday and Joan his wife, querents, by William de 
Perret in their place, and Richard Fryday, deforciant of 2 messuages, 
I carucate of land, 11 acres of meadow, 15 acres of pasture, 2 acres of 



272 Dorset Fines, 



wood and 24s. 8d. of rent in Deuelish, Donetish and Tilee juxta 
Donetish. Plea of covenant was summoned. Richard granted the 
tenements to Henry and Joan, and rendered the same at the court. To 
have and to hold to Henry and Joan and the heirs of Henry begotten^ 
of Richard and his heirs, for ever, rendering therefor yearly one rose 
at the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, for all service &amp;c., and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Richard and his heirs 
all other services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Should 
Henry die without heir of his body begotten, then after the deaths of 
both Henry and Joan the tenements wholly shall revert to Richard and 
his heirs, quit of the other heirs of Henry. To hold of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(60) At Westminster, on the morrow of Souls, between Robert 
Petyt, querent, and William de Middelton deforciant, of a messuage 
and land in Wymburne Minstre. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
William acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Robert, as by 
his gift. For this, Robert granted the tenements to William and 
rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to William during 
his life, of Robert and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose at 
the feast of the Nativity of St John Baptist for all service &amp;c., and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Robert and his heirs 
all other services which belong to those tenements. After the death 
of William the tenements wholly shall revert to Robert and his heirs 
quit of the heirs of William. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(61) At Westminster, in the octaves of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Richard de Portes, querent, and Peter le Blound 
and Reymund Heryng, deforciants, of the manor of Wynterburn Stepel- 
ton. Plea of covenant was summoned. Richard acknowledged the 
manor to be the right of Peter, as by his gift. For this Peter and 
Reymund granted the manor to Richard and rendered the same at the 
court. To have and to hold to Richard for life, of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to that manor, with ' remainder 
after his death to John Deveroys and Alice his wife and their lawful 
heirs, to hold as aforesaid, for ever. Should John die without heir 
begotten of Alice, then after the deaths of John and Alice the manor 
wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Richard, to hold as aforesaid^ 
for ever. 

(62) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, be- 
tween Roger Bisshop, chaplain, querent, and Robert Haukyn of Sture 
Cosyn, deforciant, of 4 messuages, i \ virgates of land and 3 acres of 
meadow in Sture Cosyn. Plea of covenant was summoned. Robert 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Roger and remitted 



7 Edward II. (1313-14). 273 

the same to him and his heirs from himself and his heirs, for ever. 
Moreover Robert granted for himself and his heirs that they would 
warrant the same tenements to Roger and his heirs against all men, 
for ever. For this, Roger gave to Robert one soar sparrow hawk. 

(63) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Robert 
de Pudele and Margery his wife, querents, and William de Mertok and 
William Roges, deforciants, of a messuage, mill and carucate of land 
in Pudele thrittyhide. Plea of covenant was summoned. Robert 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of William de Mertok as 
those which he and William Roges had of his gift. For this William 
de Mertok and William Roges granted the tenements to Robert and 
Margery and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to 
Robert and Margery and the heirs of Robert of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to the tenements for ever. 

(64) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between Richard 
Alewy, querent, by Walter de Cumpton in their place, and William 
de Wolfricheston, chaplain, deforciant, of a messuage and carucate of 
land in Wynterburne St. Martin. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
William acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Richard and 
rendered the same at the court. To have and to hold to Richard and 
his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
those tenements for ever. For this Richard gave to William one soar 
sparrow hawk. 

(65) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between John Alisaundre of Warham and Mabilla his wife, querents, 
and Nicholas Crubbe, deforciant, of a messuage in Warham. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Nicholas acknowledged the messuage to 
be the right of John, as that which he and Mabilla had by his gift, 
and remitted the same to John and Mabilla and the heirs of John, for 
himself and his heirs, for ever. Moreover Nicholas granted for himself 
and his heirs that they would warrant the messuage to John and 
Mabilla and the heirs of John against all men, for ever. For this John 
and Mabilla gave to Nicholas one soar sparrow hawk. 

(66) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between John Alisaundre of Warham and Mabilla his wife, querents, 
and William le Preste of Luchet Mynstre and Cristina his wife, de- 
forciants, of a messuage in Warham. Plea of covenant was summoned 
between them. William and Cristina acknowledged the messuage to 
be the right of John as that which he and Mabilla had of their gift, 
and remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Cristina to John 
and Mabilla and the heirs of John, for ever. Moreover William and 
Cristina granted for themselves and the heirs of Cristina that they 
would warrant the messuage to John and Mabilla and the heirs of John 



&gt;74 Dorset Fines. 



against all men, for ever. For this John and Mabilla gave to William 
and Cristina one soar sparrow hawk. 

(67) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John Louelich and Alice his wife, querents, and Thomas de Marleberge 
deforciant, of a messuage, land and 8s. rent in Shireburne. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. John and Alice acknowledged the tenements 
to be the right of Thomas. For this he granted them to John and 
Alice and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to John 
and Alice for their lives, of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, with remainder after their deaths, 
to Geoffrey de Pupelpenne and Joan his wife and their lawful heirs to 
hold as aforesaid, for ever. Should Geoffrey die without heir by Joan, 
then after both their deaths the tenements wholly shall remain to the 
right heirs of the said Joan, to hold as aforesaid, for ever. 

8 Edward II. (1314-15). 

(68) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between John 
de Percy and Agnes his wife, querents, and William de Cherleton, 
deforciant, of a messuage and land in Gommeresheye. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. William acknowledged the tenements to be the right 
of John, as those which he and Agnes had of William's gift, and 
remitted the same for himself and his heirs to John and Agnes and 
the heirs of John for ever. Moreover William granted for himself and 
his heirs that they would warrant the tenements to John and Agnes 
and the heirs of John against all men, for ever. For this John and 
Agnes gave to William jT/io, 

(69) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael^ 
between William de Stokes and Matilda his wife, querents, and William 
Le Frere, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Stoburghe and Breste- 
walle juxta Warham. Plea of covenant was summoned. William de 
Stokes acknowledged the tenements to be the right of William Le 
Frere, as of his gift. For this William Le Frere granted the tenements 
to William de Stokes and Matilda and the heirs of William, of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, 
for ever. 

(70) At Westminster, in the octaves of St Michael, between John 
Peverel and Isabella his wife, querents, by John Payn in their place, 
and Andrew Mause, deforciant, of a messuage, mill, land and ;^io rent 
in Bradeford Peverel, Mukelford and Whetewelle. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Andrew acknowledged the tenements to be the right 
of John Peverel, and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold 
to John Peverel and Isabella and the heirs of John of the chief lords of 



8 Edward II. (1314-15). 275 

that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 
For this John and Isabella gave to Andrew one soar sparrow hawk. 

(71) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between John 
son of Richard Maury, querent, and Richard Mauri, deforciant, of a 
messuage and land in Belle and Fitelford. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Richard granted the tenements to John and rendered 
them at the court. To have and to hold to John and the heirs of his 
body, of Richard and his heirs, for ever, rendering therefor yearly one 
rose at feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Richard and his heirs 
all other services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Should 
John die without heir of his body, then the tenements wholly shall 
revert to Richard and his heirs quit of the other heirs of the said John. 
To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services belonging to those 
tenements, for ever. 

[Endorsed.] Baldewyn Aunger put in his claim. 

(72) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between William de Stokes and Matilda his wife, querents, and William 
le Frere, deforciant, of 12 marcs of rent in Blaneford. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. William de Stokes acknowledged the rent to be the 
right of William le Frere, as of his gift. For this William le Frere 
granted the rent to William de Stokes and Matilda and rendered the 
same at the court. To have and to hold to William de Stokes and 
Matilda and their lawful heirs, of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to that rent, for ever. Should William de Stokes 
die without heir begotten of Matilda, then after the deaths of both 
William and Matilda the rent wholly shall remain to the right heirs 
of William de Stokes. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to that rent, for ever. 

(73) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, be- 
tween Thomas de Boneville and Alice his wife, querents, by William 
Peret in place of Alice, and Henry de Boneville, deforciant, of a mes- 
suage, land and is. 4d. rent in Bridie. * Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Thomas acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Henry as by 
his gift. For this Henry granted the tenements to Thomas and Alice 
and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Thomas and 
Alice and the heirs of Thomas of the chief lords of that fee by the 
^services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(74) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, be- 
tween Robert de Kentecombe and Joan his wife, querents, by William 
Peret in place of Joan, and Henry de Bonevill, deforciant, of a mes- 
suage, mill, land and 22s. 4d. of rent in Nethere Kentecombe. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. Robert acknowledged the tenements to 



&gt;76 Dorset Fines. 



be the right of Henry as of his gift. For this Henry granted the 
tenements to Robert and Joan, and rendered them at the court. To 
have and to hold to Robert and Joan and the heirs of Robert, of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, 
for ever. 

(75) At Westminster, three weeks after Easter day, between Henry 
de La Bere and Agatha his wife, querents, by John Payn in their place, 
and Henry de La Hyde, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Lange- 
hyde in Purbyk. Plea of covenant was summoned. Henry de la 
Hyde acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Henry de la 
Bere and rendered them to him and to Agatha at the court. To have 
and to hold to Henry and Agatha and the heirs of Henry, of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements for 
ever. For this Henry de la Bere and Agatha gave to Henry de la 
Hyde \o, 

(76) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John de Percy, querent, by William de Peret in his place, and Thomas 
Sterman and Joan his wife, deforciants, of a messuage and land in 
Ny wenham and Stapelbrigg. Plea of covenant was summoned. Thomas 
and Joan acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John as by 
their gift, and remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Thomas 
to John and his heirs for ever. Moreover Thomas and Joan granted 
for themselves and the heirs of Thomas that they would warrant the 
tenements to John and his heirs against all men for ever. For this 
John gave to Thomas and Joan 20 marcs of silver. 

(77) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between John 
Peytevyn and Alice his wife, querents, and Robert de Whiteclyve, 
deforciant, of a messuage and land in Cheselburneford. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. John acknowledged the tenements to be 
the right of Robert as by his gift. For this Robert granted the tene- 
ments to John and Alice, and rendered them at the court. To have 
and to hold to John and Alice for their lives, of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to the tenements, with remainder 
after their deaths to John son of the said John and the heirs of his 
body, to hold, as aforesaid, for ever. Should John the son of John die 
without heir of his body, then the tenements wholly will remain to 
Richard, brother of the said John son of John, and the heirs of his 
body, to hold, as aforesaid, for ever. Should Richard die without heir 
of his body, then the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs 
of John Peytevyn, to hold, as aforesaid, for ever. 

(78) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John de Percy, querent, by John de Middelton in his place, and Adam 
de Nywenham and Henry his son, deforciants, of a messuage and land 



9 Edw. II. (1315-16). 277 

in Nywenham and Stapelbrigge. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Adam and Henry acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John 
as by their gift, and remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of 
Henry to John and his heirs, for ever. Moreover Adam and Henry 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Henry that they would warrant 
the tenements to John and his heirs against all men, for ever. For 
this John gave to Adam and Henry jQio&gt; 

9 Edw. II. (1315-16). 

(79) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, between 
Alan de Bokesselle, querent, and William de Echingham and Eva his 
wife, deforciants, of the manor of Bryanestone and advowson of the 
church. Plea of covenant was summoned. Alan acknowledged the 
manor and advowson to be the right of Eva. For this, William and 
Eva granted them to Alan and rendered them at the court. To have 
and to hold to Alan and the heirs of his body, of the King and his heirs 
by the services which belong to the said manor and advowson, for ever, 
with remainder in default thereof to Thomas de Bokesselle and the 
heirs of his body, to hold as aforesaid, for ever. With remainder in 
default thereof to Nicholas de Bokesselle and the heirs of his body, 
to hold as aforesaid, for ever. And William and Eva and the heirs of 
Eva will warrant the manor and advowson to Alan and his heirs and 
to Thomas and his heirs if Alan died without heir of his body, and to 
Nicholas and his heirs if Thomas died without heir of his body, against 
all men, for ever. Should Nicholas die without heir of his body then 
the manor and advowson will revert to William and Eva and the heirs 
of Eva quit of the other heirs of Alan, Thomas and Nicholas. To 
hold^ as aforesaid, for ever. This concord was made by precept of the 
King. 

(80) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Michael, 
between William Anketil, querent, and Richard de Hulle and Joan his 
wife, deforciants, of 2 acres of land, 3 acres of meadow and 2 parts 
of a mill in Shafton. Plea of covenant was summoned. Richard and 
Joan acknowledged the tenements to be the right of William, and 
rendered the same at the court. To have and to hold to William and 
his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
the said tenements, for ever. Moreover Richard and Joan granted for 
themselves and the heirs of Joan that they would warrant the tenements 
to William and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this William 
gave to Richard and Joan 20 marcs of silver. 

(81) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between Scolastica Lughe, querent, and Walter le Gyst' and Matilda 



278 Dorset Fines, 



his wife, impedients, of a messuage in Dorcestre. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned. Walter and Matilda acknowledged the mes- 
suage to be the right of Scolastica as by their gift. To have and to- 
hold to Scolastica and her heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to that messuage for ever. Moreover Walter 
and Matilda granted for themselves and the heirs of Walter that they 
would warrant the messuage to Scolastica and her heirs against all 
men, for ever. For this Scolastica gave to Walter and Matilda 2a 
shillings of silver. 

(82) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, be- 
tween Adam Golafre de Cherdestoke and Matilda daughter of Richard 
de Bouedich, querents, by Philip Payn in their place, and John son of 
Richard de Bouedich, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Cherde- 
stoke. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of Matilda and rendered them to Adam and 
Matilda at the court. To have and to hold to Adam and Matilda and 
the heirs of Matilda, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the said tenements, for ever. For this, Adam and Matilda 
gave to John 100 shillings of silver. 

(83) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Michael, 
between William de Blykewyne, querent, and Robert Lof of Chiclet 
and Alice his wife, deforciants, of a messuage, 2 shops, 10 acres of 
land, 3 acres of meadow and 3s. 4d. rent in Shafton. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Robert and Alice acknowledged the tenements to be 
the right of William as by their gift. For this William granted them 
to Robert and Alice and rendered them at the court. To have and to 
hold to Robert and Alice and the heirs they beget of the chief lords of 
that fee, by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever* 
Should Robert die without heir by Alice, then after the deaths of both 
Robert and Alice 6 acres of the aforesaid land which lie in a certain 
field called Southcroft wholly shall remain to Peter son of the said 
Alice and the heirs of his body, to hold as aforesaid. And the remain- 
ing 4 acres which lie in a certain field called Northcroft wholly shall 
remain to Agnes daughter of the said Alice and the heirs of her body 
begotten, to hold as aforesaid. Should Peter and Agnes die without 
heirs of their bodies begotten as is aforesaid, then the 6 acres, the 4 
acres, the messuage, shops, meadow and rent after the deaths of Robert 
and Alice wholly shall remain to the right heirs of the said Alice, to- 
hold as aforesaid, for ever. 

(84) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Michael, 
between William Anketil and Isabella his wife, querents, and Robert 
Lof and Alice his wife, deforciants, of 2 mills and 12 acres of land in 
Schafton. Plea of covenant was summoned. William acknowledged 



9 Edw, IL (1315-16). 279 

the tenements to be the right of Alice. For this Robert and Alice 
granted them to William and Isabella and rendered them at the court. 
To have and to hold to William and Isabella and the heirs of William 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the said 
tenements for ever. For this William and Isabella granted for them- 
selves and the heirs of William that they would render every year to 
Robert and Alice, during the lives of Robert and Alice, 6 marcs of 
silver, with a clause for distraint for non payment. After the decease 
of Robert and Alice, the aforesaid William and Isabella and the heirs, 
of William shall be quit of the payment of the said money, for ever. 

(85) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael^ 
between William de Cherleton, querent, and William Atte Mede, de- 
forciant, of land in Knyghteton and Bere. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. William Atte Mede acknowledged the tenements to be 
the right of William de Cherleton as by his gift. For this he granted 
them to William Atte Mede and rendered them at the court. To have 
and to hold to William Atte Mede during his life, of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to the tenements, with remainder 
after his decease to Isabella daughter of William de Mosters, to hold 
during her life, as aforesaid. After her decease with remainder to the 
right heirs of William Atte Mede, to hold, as aforesaid, for ever. 

[Endorsed.] Robert Stikelaue and Joan his wife put in their claim. 
Henry Tracy and Margaret his wife put in their claim. 

(86) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, 
between John de Mere and Alianora his wife, querents, by Walter de 
Cumpton in Alianora's place, and Thomas de Marleberge, deforciant, 
of a messuage and land in Langenham and Gyllyngham. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. John acknowledged the tenements to be 
the right of Thomas, who, for this, granted them to John and Alianora 
and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to John and 
Alianora and the heirs of John, of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to those tenements, for ever. And Thomas and 
his heirs will warrant the tenements to John and Alianora and the heirs 
of John against all men, for ever. 

(87) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Michael, 
between Robert de Holm, querent, and Alice who was the wife of John 
de Holm, deforciant, of land in Parva Kymerych and Westholme. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Alice acknowledged the tenements 
to be the right of Robert as by her gift. For this, Robert granted 
them to Alice and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold 
to Alice for her life, of Robert and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly 
one rose at feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service &amp;c.,. 
and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Robert and his heirs 



28o Dorset Fines, 



all other services which belong to those tenements. After the decease 
of Alice the tenements wholly shall revert to Robert and his heirs quit 
of the heirs of Alice. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(88) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between John de Tenhide and Margaret his wife, querents, and Robert 
&lt;ie Wilmyndon, clerk, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Durewyne- 
ston and Knyghteton. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of Robert as by his gift. For 
this Robert granted the tenements to John and Margaret and rendered 
them at the court. To have and to hold to John and Margaret and 
the heirs they beget, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to those tenements, for ever. Should John die without heir 
by Margaret, then after the decease of both John and Margaret the 
tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of John. To hold, 
as aforesaid, for ever. 

(89) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Michael, 
between John Le Dun, querent, and John Comyn and Hawysia his 
wife, deforciants, of 5 messuages  in Shafton. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. John Comyn and Hawisia acknowledged the messuages 
to be the right of John Le Dun as by their gift. To have and to hold 
to John Le Dun and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to those messuages, for ever. Moreover John 
Comyn and Hawisia granted for themselves and the heirs of Hawisia 
that they would warrant the messuages to John Le Dun and his heirs 
against all men, for ever. For this, John Le Dun gave to John Comyn 
and Hawisia ;^io. 

(go) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between William de Cutehaghe and Matilda his wife, querents, and 
John de Clofford, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Mershwode. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. William acknowledged the tene- 
ments to be the right of John, as by his gift. For this, John granted 
them to William and Matilda, and rendered them at the court. To 
have and to hold to William and Matilda for their lives, of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements, with 
remainder after their deaths, to Robert de Hyndecombe and Florence 
his wife and the heirs they beget, to hold as aforesaid, for ever. Should 
Robert die without heir by Florence, then after the deaths of Robert 
and Florence the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of 
Robert, to hold as aforesaid, for ever. 

(gi) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, be- 
tween Nicholas de Brente, vicar of the church of Cherde, querent, and 
Roger Cosyn and Joan his wife, deforciants, of a messuage and land 



9 Edw. IL (1315-16). 281 

in Nywenham juxta Brodewyndesore. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Nicholas acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Roger. For this, Roger and Joan granted them to Nicholas and 
rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Nicholas for life, 
of Roger and Joan and the heirs of Roger, rendering therefor yearly 
to them 30s. of silver for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for Roger and Joan and the heirs of Roger all other 
services which belong to the tenements. After the death of Nicholas 
the tenements wholly revert to Roger and Joan and the heirs of Roger, 
quit of the heirs of Nicholas. To hold of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to the said tenements, for ever. 

(92) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Roger Bisshop, chaplain, querent, and Walter 
de Corf, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Shafton. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Walter acknowledged the tenements to be 
the right of Roger, as by his gift. For this Roger granted them to 
Walter, and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to 
Walter and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(93) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John de La Tour and Juliana his wife, querents, by William Peret in 
place of Juliana, and Master Thomas de Excestre, deforciant, of 2 
messuages, 6 bovates and 56 acres of land, 11^ acres of meadow, and 
43s. 4d. of rent in Fromefrauchurche, Modbergh juxta Swere and 
Scurtil. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of Master Thomas, as by his gift, who, for 
this, granted them to John and Juliana and rendered them at the court. 
To have and to hold to John and Juliana and the heirs they beget, of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tene- 
ments, for ever. Should John die without heir begotten of Juliana, 
then, after the deaths of both John and Juliana the tenements wholly 
shall remain to the right heirs of John, to hold of the chief lords as 
aforesaid, for ever. 

(94) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between John de Muleborn, querent, by Richard Le Slyk in his place, 
and John Gerneys, deforciant, of the manor of Muleborn Micheleston, 
except 24 acres of the manor. Plea of covenant was summoned. John 
Gerneys granted the manor as is aforesaid to John de Muleborn and 
rendered the same at the court. To have and to hold to John de Mule- 
born for life, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to such manor, with remainder after his decease to Margery daughter 
of John Payn of Cartreston, to hold of the chief lords as is aforesaid 
during her life, with remainder after her decease to Joan, her daughter. 



282 Dorset Fines, 



and the heirs of her body, to hold of the chief lords as is aforesaid, for 
ever. Should Joan die without heir of her body, the manor as is afore- 
said wholly shall remain to the right heirs of John de Muleborn, to 
hold as is aforesaid for ever. For this John de Muleborn gave to John 
Gerneys 100 marcs of silver. 

(95) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Richard de Cruket and Cristina his wife, querents, by Philip Payn in 
their place, and Michael de Cruket deforciant, of a messuage, mill, 
carucate of land and 4s. of rent in Brodewaye and Wayernwaut, which 
Edward Robe holds for term of 9 years. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Michael acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Richard, and granted for himself and his heirs that those tenements 
which Edward held for term of 9 years by lease from himself on the 
day this fine was made, and which after such term ought to revert to 
him and his heirs, should wholly remain to Richard and Cristina and 
the heirs they beget. To hold of Michael and his heirs for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly i penny at feast of St. John Baptist for all 
service, and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Michael 
and his heirs all other services which belong to those tenements, for 
ver. Michael and his heirs will warrant the tenements to Richard 
and Cristina against all men, for ever. Should Richard die without 
heir of his body, then after the deaths of both Richard and Cristina 
the tenements wholly shall revert to Michael and his heirs quit 
of the other heirs of Richard and Cristina. To hold of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tene- 
ments, for ever. For this Richard and Cristina gave to Michael 
100 marcs of silver. This concord was made in the presence of 
Edward who agreed thereto and did fealty to Richard and Christina 
at the court. 

(96) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Nicholas Brun, querent, and Richard de Kelleshale, deforciant, 
of a messuage and land in Sturministre Mareschal. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Nicholas acknowledged the tenements to be the right 
of Richard as by his gift. For this Richard granted them to Nicholas 
and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Nicholas 
during his life, of Richard and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly a 
rose at feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service &amp;c., and 
doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for Richard and his heirs all 
other services which belong to those tenements. After the death of 
Nicholas the tenements wholly shall revert to Richard and his heirs 
quit of the heirs of Nicholas. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(97) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 



9 Edw. II. (1315-16). 283 

between John le Yonge, junior, querent, and John le Yonge, senior, 
deforciant, of a messuage and land in Horton. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. John le Yonge, senior, acknowledged the tenements to be 
the right of John, junior, as by his gift. For this John, junior, granted 
the tenements to John, senior, and rendered them at the court. To 
have and to hold to John, senior, for his life, of John, junior, and his 
heirs. Rendering therefor yearly one rose at the feast of St. John 
Baptist for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that 
fee for John, junior, and his heirs, all other services which belong to 
the said tenements. After the death of John, senior, the tenements 
shall revert to John, junior, and his heirs quit of the heirs of John, 
senior. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(98) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Stephen son of Stephen Godwyne, querent, by John Payn in his place, 
and Thomas de Chigewell and Agatha his wife and Juliana La Rous, 
deforciants, of a messuage, 15 acres of land and 5s. of rent in Cranford. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Thomas and Agatha and Juliana 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Stephen as by their 
gift. To have ,and to hold to Stephen and his heirs of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the said tene- 
ments, for ever. Moreover Thomas and Agatha and Juliana granted 
for themselves and the heirs of Agatha that they would warrant the 
tenements to Stephen and his heirs against all men, for ever. For 
this Stephen gave to Thomas and Agatha and Juliana 20 marcs of 
silver. 

(99) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Robert son of Elias Golde of Seuebergh, querent, and John 
de Brideport, parson of the church of Brideport, deforciant, of a mes- 
suage and land in Sanputte and Drempton which Richard Terry and 
Alice his wife hold for term of life. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Robert acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John. For this, 
John granted for himself and his heirs that the tenements which 
Richard and Alice held for term of life, of the inheritance of him the 
said John in the said vills, on the day this concord was made and which 
after the deaths of Richard and Alice ought to revert to him and his 
heirs, should wholly remain to Robert and his heirs. To hold of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, 
for ever. And John and his heirs will warrant the tenements as is 
aforesaid to Robert and his heirs against all men for ever. This con- 
cord was made in the presence of Richard and Alice who agreed thereto 
and did fealty to Robert in the court. 

[Endorsed,'] John de Langele put in his claim. 



284 Dorset Fines, 



10 Edward II. (1316-17). 

(100) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, 
between Robert le Ny weman of Warham and Matilda his wife, querents, 
and Robert de Rocheford and Margaret his wife, deforciants, of a mes- 
suage and land in Monekwode and Cutehay. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Robert de Rocheford acknowledged the tenements to be 
the right of Robert le Nyweman, as those which he and Matilda had 
by his gift. For this, Robert le Nyweman and Matilda granted the 
tenements to Robert de Rocheford and Margaret and rendered them at 
the court. To have and to hold to Robert de Rocheford and Margaret 
for their lives, of Robert le Nyweman and Matilda and the heirs of 
Robert le Nyweman, rendering therefor yearly a rose at feast of the 
Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of that fee for Robert le Nyweman and Matilda and the 
heirs of Robert le Nyweman all other services which belong to those 
tenements. After the deaths of Robert and Margaret the tenements 
wholly shall revert to Robert le Nyweman and Matilda and the heirs 
of Robert le Nyweman quit of the heirs of Robert de Rocheford and 
Margaret, to hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. 

(loi) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between John 
de Car}', querent, and John Morbath, deforciant, of a messuage and 
land in Morbath juxta Simondesburgh. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. John de Morbath acknowledged the tenements to be the right 
of John de Gary, as by his gift. To have and to hold to John de Gary 
and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to those tenements, for ever. Moreover John de Morbath granted for 
himself and his heirs that they would warrant the tenements to John 
de Gary and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this John de Gary 
gave to John de Morbath 20 marcs of silver. 

(102) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St, Michael,, 
between Philip Lucien, junior, querent, and Philip Lucien, senior^ 
deforciant, of a messuage, land and 5 marcs of rent in Boukeresweston, 
which Gossettus de Audenarde and Margaret his wife hold for the life 
of Margaret. Plea of covenant was summoned. Philip, senior, acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of Philip, junior, and granted 
for himself and his heirs that those tenements which after Margaret's 
death ought to revert to him and his heirs, should then wholly remain 
to Philip, junior, and his heirs. To hold of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Philip, 
senior, and his heirs will warrant the tenements as is aforesaid to 
Philip, junior, and his heirs, against all men, for ever. For this^ 
Philip, junior, gave to Philip, senior, 100 marcs of silver. This con- 



lo Edward II, (1316-17). 285 

cord was made in the presence of Gossettus and Margaret who agreed 
thereto and did fealty to Philip Lucien, junior, in the court. 

(103) At Westminster, in the octaves of Saint Hilar}', between John 
le Peg, querent, and Robert le Peg, deforciant, of a messuage, mill and 
land in Iwerne Ministre. Plea of covenant was summoned. John ac- 
knowledged the tenements to be the right of Robert. For this Robert 
granted them to John and rendered them at the court. To have and to 
hold to John and the heirs of his body of Robert and his heirs, for ever, 
rendering therefor yearly a rose at the feast of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist for all service, &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that 
fee for Robert and his heirs all other services which belong to the said 
tenements, for ever. With remainder, should John die without heirs of 
his body, to Michael brother of John and the heirs of his body, to hold 
of Robert and his heirs as aforesaid, for ever. With remainder, should 
Michael die without heir of his body to Robert brother of Michael and 
the heirs of his body, to hold of Robert and his heirs as aforesaid, for 
ever. Should Robert brother of Michael die without heir of his body, 
the tenements wholly shall revert to Robert le Peg and his heirs, quit 
of the other heirs of John, Michael and Robert. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the said tenements for 
ever. 

(104) At Westminster, in the octaves of Saint Hilary, between 
Nicholas de Blakemore, querent, by William Cole in his place, and 
Henry de Glannvill, deforciant, of a messuage, mill and land in 
Wotton Glannvill, Westpulham, Wouburn, Asshe and Wolueton. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Henry granted the tenements 
to Nicholas and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold 
to Nicholas during his life, of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the tenements, with remainder after his decease to 
Giles, son of the said Nicholas, and Elizabeth his wife and the heirs 
they shall beget. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, for ever. Should Giles die without 
heir by Elizabeth, then after the deaths of both Giles and Elizabeth the 
tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Nicholas. To 
hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. For this Nicholas 
gave to Henry 100 marcs of silver. 

(105) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
William Haym and Alice his wife, querents, by Thomas de Harpe. 
den in their place, and William de Buggelee and Amicia his wife, 
deforciants, of the bailiwick of the " forestagium " of the forest of 
Gyllingham (" balliva forestarie foreste de Gyllingham ").* Plea of 

 Du Cange gives " forestagium " as the equivalent of ** forestaria," which signifies 
a sort of tollage or dues payable in the forest to the forester. 

19 



286 Dorset Fines, 



covenant was summoned. William de Buggelee and Amicia granted 
the bailiwick to William Haym and Alice and rendered the same at 
the court. To have and to hold to him and his wife and the heirs of 
their bodies, of the King and his heirs by the services which pertain to 
such bailiwick for ever. Should William Haym and Alice die without 
heir of their bodies, then the bailiwick wholly shall remain to the 
right heirs of William Haym. To hold of the King and his heirs as 
aforesaid^ for ever. William de Buggelee and Amicia and the heirs of 
Amicia will warrant the bailiwick to William Haym and Alice and 
their heirs as aforesaid, and also to the right heirs of William Haym 
should he and Alice die without heir of their bodies, against all men^ 
for ever. For this, William Haym and Alice gave to William de 
Buggelee and Amicia ioo. This concord was made by precept of the 
King. 

(io6) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
William Hayn and Alice his wife, querents, by Thomas de Harpe- 
don in place of Alice, and John Cley and Elizabeth his wife, deforciants, 
of a messuage in Gyllyngham. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
John and Elizabeth acknowledged the messuage to be the right of 
William, and rendered it to him and Alice at the court. To have 
and to hold to William and Alice and the heirs of William of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the messuage&gt; 
for ever. Moreover they granted for themselves and the heirs of 
Elizabeth that they would warrant the messuage to William and 
Alice and the heirs of William against all men for ever. For this^ 
William and Alice gave to John and Elizabeth loo shillings of silver. 

(107) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. John Baptist, between 
John de Orchard and Sarra his wife, querents, by William de Stapleton 
in place of Sarra, and William de Orchard and Cecilia his wife, defor- 
ciants, of a fourth part of the manor of Boukeresweston, except one 
virgate of land in the said manor. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
William and Cecilia acknowledged the fourth part, as is aforesaid, to 
be the right of John, and rendered it to him and Sarra at the court. 
To have and to hold to John and Sarra and the heirs of lohn, of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to such fourth part, 
^or ever. Moreover William and Cecilia granted for themselves and 
the heirs of William that they would warrant such fourth part to John 
and Sarra and the heirs of John against all men, for ever. For this, 
John and Sarra gave to William and Cecilia 20 marcs of silver. 

(108) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Henry de Legh, senior, querent, and Thomas de Excestre, deforciant, 
of a messuage and land in Thornford. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Henry acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Thomas, as by 



II Edward I L (1317-18). 28; 

his gift. For this, Thomas granted them to Henry and rendered them 
at the court. To have and to hold to Henry for life, of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements. After the 
death of Henry the tenements wholly shall remain to John, son of 
Henry, and Margaret his wife and the heirs of their bodies. To hold 
of the chief lords as aforesaid, for ever. Should John and Margaret die 
without heir of their bodies, then the tenements wholly shall remain to 
the right heirs of Henry. To hold as aforesaid for ever. 

II Edward II. (1317-18). 

(109) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, 
between Peter de Wylteshire and Matilda his wife, querents, by the said 
Peter in his wife's place, and Thomas de Meleplesch and Margery his 
wife, deforciants, of a messuage and land in Chelesbury and Dudeling- 
ton. Plea of covenant was summoned. Peter acknowledged the tene- 
ments to be the right of Margery. For this Thomas and Margery granted 
them to Peter and Matilda and rendered them at the court. To have 
and to hold to Peter and Matilda and the heirs of their bodies, of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements, 
for ever. Should Peter and Matilda die without heir of their bodies, 
then the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Peter. To 
hold of the chief lords as aforesaid, for ever. 

(no) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between Richard de Portes, querent, and William de Wytefeld, defor- 
ciant, of the manor of Wirdesford. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Richard acknowledged the manor to be the right of William, as by his 
gift. For this William granted it to Richard and rendered it at the 
court. To have and to hold to Richard for life, of William and his 
heirs, rendering therefor yearly a rose at the feast of the Nativity of St. 
John Baptist for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords 
of that fee for William and his heirs all other services which belong to 
the said manor. After the decease of Richard the manor wholly shall 
revert to William and his heirs quit of the heirs of Richard. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the manor, 
for ever. 

(m) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. Martin, between John 
Bailly of Dorcestre, querent, and John Scot and Margaret his wife, 
impedients, of a messuage in Dorcestre. Plea of warranty of deed 
was summoned. John Scot and Margaret acknowledged the messuage 
to be the right of John Bailly as by their gift. To have and to hold 
to John Bailly and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the ser- 
vices which belong to that messuage, for ever. Moreover they have 



288 Dorset Fines. 



granted for themselves and the heirs of Margaret that they will warrant 
the messuage to John Bailly and his heirs against all men, for ever. 
For this John Bailly gave to John Scot and Margaret lOO shillings of 
silver. 

(112) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between 
Ralph de la Hide and Alianora his wife, querents, by John Payn in 
Alianora's place, and William Baret and Joan his wife, deforciants of a 
messuage, land, 20s. of rent and a rent of i pound of pepper and \ 
pound of wax in Alfrinton, Herston, Swanewych and Alfledesmulle. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. William and Joan granted the 
tenements to Ralph and Alianora and rendered them at the court. 
To have and to hold to Ralph and Alianora and the heirs of their 
bodies of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
the tenements, for ever. Should Ralph and Alianora die without 
heir of their bodies, then the tenements wholly shall remain to John 
de la Hide and Edith his wife and the heirs of their bodies. To hold 
of the chief lords as aforesaid, for ever. Should John and Edith die 
without heir of their bodies, then the tenements wholly shall remain to 
Henry de la Hide and his heirs, to hold as aforesaid, for ever. 

(113) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between John 
de London of Aulton, clerk, querent, and John de Middellambrok and 
Cristina his wife, deforciants, of 180 acres of land, 4 acres of meadow, 
12 pence of rent, and a rent of one pound of pepper in Horton, Kynge- 
ston and Brokhampton. .Plea of covenant was summoned. John de 
Middellambrok and Cristina acknowledged the rent to be the right 
of John de London and rendered the same to him at the court To 
have and to hold to him and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to that rent for ever. Moreover they 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Cristina that 100 acres of land 
and 3 acres of meadow which Walter de Cokfeld and Cecilia his wife 
hold for term of Cecilia^s life in Horton and Kyngeston, and 60 acres of 
land which John Somer held for life in Kyngeston, and 20 acres of land 
and I acre of meadow which John de Berewyk held for life of the 
inheritance of the said Cristina in the town of Brokhampton on the day 
this concord was made and which after the death of Cecilia and John 
Somer and John de Berewyk ought to revert to John de Middellambrok 
and Cristina and the heirs of Cristina, should instead, remain to John 
de London and his heirs. To hold together with the rent which 
remains to him by this fine, of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, for ever. And John de Middellam- 
brok and Cristina and the heirs of Cristina will warrant the tenements 
to John de London and his heirs against all men for ever. For this 
John de London gave to John de Middellambrok and Cristina 100 



II Edward I L (1317-18). 289 

marcs of silver. This concord was made, there being present the 
said Walter and Cecilia and John de Berewyk who agreed thereto, 
and John de Berewyk did fealty to John de London. And Walter and 
Cecilia rendered the said 100 acres of land and 3 acres of meadow 
to John de London in the said court. 

(114A) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between John 
Mautravers, junior, querent, and Walter de Thornhull and Margery his 
wife, deforciants, of the manor of Phelpeston. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Walter and Margery acknowledged the manor to be the 
right of John and remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of 
Margery to John and his heirs for ever. For this John gave to Walter 
and Margery 100 marcs of silver. 

\Endorsed?^ John Musket put in his claim. 

(114B) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, 
between James de* Wynterbourneclencheton, querent, and John Le 
Yung of Horton, deforciant, of 3 messuages and 2 virgates of land. in 
Horton, Bernardeslee and Shaupwyk. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
John acknowledged the tenements to be the right of James, as by his 
gift. To have and to hold to James and his heirs of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to the said tenements, for ever. 
Moreover John granted for himself and his heirs that they will warrant 
the tenements to James and his heirs against all men, for ever. For 
this James gave to John 100 marcs of silver. 

(115) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Henry 
de la Hyde, querent, and William [Baret*] and Joan his wife, deforci- 
ants, of a messuage, a mill, 2 carucates of land, 25 acres of meadow, 
500 acres of heath, 30 shillings of rent, and a rent of one pound of 
pepper in Murton, Rushton, Hurst, Stokforde, Carry, Wolgarston, 
Knyghtwyneston, Holton, Brussane, Bramescumb, and Kyngebrigge 
and Benegar, and the bailiwick of keeping the meadow [de balliva 
custodiendi pratum] of Ruston. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
William and Joan acknowledged the tenements and bailiwick to be the 
right of Henry as by their gift. For this Henry granted them to 
William and Joan and rendered them at the court. To have and to 
hold to William and Joan during their lives, of Henry and his heirs, 
rendering therefor yearly a rose at the feast of the Nativity of St. John 
Baptist for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that 
fee for Henry and his heirs all other services which belong to the tene- 
ments and bailiwick. After the deaths of William and Joan the tene- 
ments and bailiwick wholly shall remain to Ralph de la Hyde and 
Alianora his wife and the heirs of their bodies, to hold of the said 

* The name Baret is quite defaced in this Bne, but see Bne 117, doubtless the same 
parties. 



290 Dorset Fines. 



Henry by the services as aforesaid, for ever. Should Ralph and 
Alianora die without heir of their bodies, then the tenements and 
bailiwick wholly shall remain to John de la Hyde and Edith his wife 
and the heirs of their bodies, to hold of Henry by the services as afore- 
said for ever. Should John and Edith die without heir of their bodies, 
then the tenements and bailiwick wholly shall remain to Henry and 
his heirs quit of the other heirs of William and Joan, Ralph and 
Alianora, John and Edith. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to the tenements and bailiwick, for ever. 

(116) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin, 
between John, son of John de Clavile and Isolda his wife, querents, 
by Robert de Wynterburn in their place, and John de Clavile and 
Isabella his wife, deforciants, of 17 messuages, 6 virgates of land, 23 
acres of meadow and 6s. of rent in Westmordon and Estmordon. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. John and Isabella granted the tenements 
to John and Isolda and rendered them at the court. To have and to 
hold to them and the heirs of their bodies of John and Isabella and the 
heirs of John for ever, rendering therefor yearly a rose at the feast of 
the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor 
to the chief lords of that fee for John and Isabella and the heirs of John 
all other services which belong to the tenements, for ever. Should John 
son of John and Isolda die without heir of their bodies then the tene- 
ments wholly shall revert to John de Clavile and Isabella and the heirs 
of John quit of the other heirs of John son of John and Isolda. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements, for ever. For this John son of John and Isolda gave to 
John de Clavile and Isabella 100 marcs of silver. 

(117) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between 
Henry de la Hyde, querent, and William Baret and Joan his wife, 
deforciants of a messuage, 3 carucates of land, 40 acres of meadow, 
15 acres of wood, 17s. of rent, and a rent of i pound of cumin in 
Lyndelinche, Rodmor, Withe Paule and Mangerton. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. William acknowledged the tenements to be the right 
of Henry as by his gift. For this, Henry granted them to William 
and Joan and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to 
William and Joan for their lives, of Henry and his heirs, rendering 
therefor yearly a rose at the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist 
for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for 
Henry and his heirs all other services which belong to the tenements. 
After the deaths of William and Joan the tenements wholly shall 
remain to John de La Hyde and Edith his wife and the heirs of their 
bodies, to hold of Henry and his heirs by the said services for ever. 
Should John and Edith die without heir of their bodies, then the tene- 



II Edward I L (1317-18). 291 

ments wholly shall remain to Ralph de La Hyde and Alianora his wife 
and the heirs of their bodies, to hold, as aforesaid, for ever. Should 
Ralph and Alianora die without heir of their bodies, then the tenements 
wholly shall revert to Henry and his heirs quit of the heirs of William 
and Joan, John and Edith, Ralph and Alianora. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for 
ever. 

(118) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, 
between John de London, clerk, querent, and William de Caneford and 
Joan his wife, deforciants, of a messuage, 28 acres of land and a rent 
of I pound of wax in Brokhampton. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
William and Joan acknowledged the tenements, together with the 
homage and whole service of Peter de Brokhampton and his heirs in 
respect of the whole of the tenements which he held of the said William 
and Joan previously in the said vill, to be the right of John, and 
rendered the said messuage and land to him at the court. To have 
and to hold to John and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Moreover William 
and Joan granted for themselves and the heirs of Joan that they will 
warrant the tenements as is aforesaid to John and his heirs against 
all men for ever. For this, John gave to William and Joan 20 marcs 
of silver. 

(119) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Henry 
de Berewyk and Matilda his wife, querents, and Thomas Leute and 
Alice his wife, deforciants, of a messuage in Shefton. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Henry and Matilda acknowledged the messuage to 
be the right of Thomas and rendered it to him at the court. To have 
and to hold to Thomas and Alice and the heirs of Thomas, of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the said messuage, 
for ever. Moreover Henry and Matilda granted for themselves and 
the heirs of Matilda that they will warrant the messuage to Thomas 
and Alice and the heirs of Thomas against all men, for ever. For this 
Thomas and Alice gave to Henry and Matilda 10 marcs of silver. 

(120) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between John 
de Gary and Cristina his wife, querents, by William de Peret in Cris- 
ttna's place, and William de Whitefeld and Margery his wife, defor- 
ciants, of a messuage, a mill, 4 virgates of land, 20 acres of meadow, 
40 acres of wood and 14s. of rent in Stok Waleys and Whitchurche. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. William and Margery acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of John as those which he and Cristina 
had by their gift. To have and to hold to John and Cristina and the 
heirs of John, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to those tenements, for ever. Moreover William and Margery granted 



292 Dorset Fines. 



for themselves and the heirs of William that they will warrant the 
tenements to John and Cristina and the heirs of John against all men^ 
for ever. For this John and Cristina gave to William and Margery 
100 marcs of silver. 

(121) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between John de Wymborne and Roger Alban, querents, 
and Robert de Ladene and Juliana his wife, deforciants, of a messuage 
in Wymborne. Plea of covenant was summoned. Robert and Juliana 
acknowledged the messuage to be the right of John as that which he 
and Roger had of their gift. To have and to hold to John and Roger 
and the heirs of John of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to that messuage for ever. Moreover Robert and Juliana 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Robert that they will warrant 
the messuage to John and Roger and the heirs of John against all men 
for ever. For this John and Roger gave to Robert and Juliana 100 
shillings of silver. 

\Endorsed^ Roger de La Dene and Matilda his wife put in their 
claim. 

(122) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between 
Richard de Waye and Matilda his wife, querents, by John Payn in 
Matilda's place, and William Jordan, senior, deforciant, of a messuage, 
3 virgates of land and 3 acres of meadow in Westbrok juxta Waye 
Nichole. Plea of covenant was summoned. Richard acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of William as by his gift. For this 
William granted them to Richard and Matilda and rendered them 
at the court. To have and to hold to Richard and Matilda and the 
heirs of Richard, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. 

(123) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between 
Thomas Leaute and Alice his wife, querents, and Henry de Berwyk 
and Matilda his wife, deforciants, of 4 messuages in Shafton. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Thomas and Alice acknowledged the 
messuages to be the right of Henry and rendered them to Henry 
and Matilda at the court. To have and to hold to Henry and Matilda 
and the heirs of Henry of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those messuages for ever. Moreover Thomas and 
Alice granted for themselves and the heirs of Alice that they will 
warrant the messuages to Henry and Matilda and the heirs of Henry 
against all men, for ever. For this Henry and Matilda gave to 
Thomas and Alice 20 marcs of silver. 

(124) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, 
between Richard de Wylteshire and Joan his wife, querents, and 
Peter de Wylteshire, deforciant, of a messuage, 2 carucates of land 



II Edward I L (1317-18). 293 

and 6s. of rent in Dudelington and Chelesbury. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Richard acknowledged the tenements to be the right 
of Peter. For this, Peter granted to Richard and Joan the messuage 
and I carucate of land and the rent and rendered the same at the court* 
To have and to hold to Richard and Joan and the heirs of their bodies, 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements, for ever. Moreover Peter granted for himself and his 
heirs that i carucate of the said land which Cristina who was wife 
of John de Wylteshire held in dower of the inheritance of the said 
Peter in the said vills on the day this concord was made, and which 
after the death of Cristina ought to revert to him (Peter) and his heirs, 
should then remain to Richard and Joan and their heirs aforesaid. To 
hold together with the aforesaid tenements which remain to them by 
this fine, of the chief lords .of that fee by the services which belong 
to those tenements, for ever. Should Richard die without heir by 
Joan, then after the deaths of both Richard and Joan the tenements 
wholly shall remain to Richard son of Richard de Haveryngg and 
the heirs of his body. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Should Richard 
son of Richard die without heir of his body, then the tenements wholly 
shall remain to Laurence de Wylteshire and his heirs. To hold, as 
aforesaid, for ever. 

(125) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary^ 
between Henry Eldaker and Edith his wife, querents, by William de 
Peret in Edith's place, and John Malverne and Joan his wife, de- 
forciants, of a messuage in Milburnchyrcheton St. Andrew. Plea of 
covenant was summoned, John and Joan acknowledged the messuage 
to be the right of Henry, as that which he and Edith had by their gift. 
To have and to hold to Henry and Edith and the heirs of Henry of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that messuage^ 
for ever. Moreover John and Joan granted for themselves and the heirs 
of Joan that they will warrant the messuage to Henry and Edith and 
the heirs of Henry against all men, for ever. For this Henry and Edith 
gave to John and Joan 100 shillings of silver. 

(126) At Westminster in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
William Bristwy of Shafton, querent, and John Hux and Roesia his 
wife, deforciants, of 3 acres of land and 6 acres of wood in Shafton. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. John and Roesia acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of William, as by their gift. To have and 
to hold to William and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Moreover John 
and Roesia granted for themselves and the heirs of John that they will 
warrant the tenements to William and his heirs against all men for 



294 Dorset Fines. 

ever. For this, William gave to John and Roesia lo marcs of 
silver. 

C127) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between John 
son of John Beauboys, querent, and Henry de Thornhull and Alianora 
his wife, deforciants, of a messuage and i carucate of land in Lyde- 
lynch. Plea of covenant was summoned between them. Henry and 
Alianora acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John as by 
their gift. For this, John granted them to Henry and Alianora and 
rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Henry and 
Alianora during their lives, of John and his heirs, rendering therefor 
yearly a rose at the feast of the Nativity of Sl John Baptist for all 
service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for John 
and his heirs all other services which belong to those tenements. After 
the deaths of Henry and Alianora the tenements wholly shall remain to 
Robert, son of the said Henry, and the heirs of his body. To hold of John 
and his heirs by the said sarvices for ever. Should Robert die without 
heir of his body, then the tenements wholly shall revert to John and 
his heirs quit of the other heirs of Henry and Alianora and Robert. 
To hold of the chief lords by the said services for ever. 

(128) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John Jue and Idonia his wife, querents, and John Payn, deforciant, of 
a messuage, 4 carucates of land and 100 shillings of rent in Haselbere, 
Stocketurbervile and Crockerestock and the advowson of a moiety of the 
church of Haselbere. Plea of covenant was summoned. John Jue 
acknowledged the tenements and advowson to be the right of John 
Payn as by his gift. For this John Payn granted them to John Jue 
and Idonia and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to 
John Jue and Idonia during their lives, of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to the tenements and advowson, with re- 
mainder after their deaths to Thomas, son of John Jue, and Isabella 
daughter of Stephen de Abyngdon, and the heirs of the bodies of the 
said Thomas and Isabella. To hold of the chief lords as aforesaid for 
ever ; with the remainder, should Thomas and Isabella die without heir 
of their bodies, to Matilda sister of Thomas and the heirs of her body, 
to hold, as aforesaid, for ever ; with remainder, should Matilda die 
without heir of her body, to Alice daughter of John Jue and the heirs 
of her body to hold, as aforesaid, for ever; with remainder, should 
Alice die without heir of her body, to Thomas son of Walter Jue and 
the heirs of his body, to hold, as aforesaid, for ever ; with remainder, 
should Thomas son of Walter die without heir of his body, to John son 
of Ingelramus le Waleys and Joan his wife and the heirs of Joan. To 
hold, as aforesaid, for ever. 

(129) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 



II Edward I L (1317-18). 295 

between Giles Tonere and Amicia his wife, querents, and Master 
Simon de Lym, deforciant, of a messuage and 2 carucates of land in 
Lodere Lucton. Plea of covenant was summoned. Giles acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of Master Simon as by his gift. 
For this, Master Simon granted them to Giles and Amicia and rendered 
them at the court. To have and to hold to Giles and Amicia during 
their lives, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to those tenements. After the deaths of Giles and Amkia the tene- 
ments wholly will remain to John Martyn of Lym and his heirs. To 
hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements, for ever. 

(130) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
John de Pymore, querent, and Robert de Pymore, deforciant, of a 
messuage, land, mill and 20s. of rent in Pymore juxta Brideport. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. Robert acknowledged the tenements to 
be the right of John as by his gift. For this, John granted them to 
Robert and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Robert 
during life, of John and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly a rose at 
the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service and demand 
to the said John and his heirs belonging, and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for John and his heirs all other services which belong 
to those tenements. After the death of Robert the tenements wholly 
shall revert to John and his heirs quit of the heirs of Robert. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements for ever. 

(131) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John de Harnham of Shafton, querent, and Richard le Palmere senior, 
deforciant, of a messuage in Shafton. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Richard acknowledged the messuage to be the right of John and rendered 
the same to him at the court. To have and to hold to John and his 
heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to that 
messuage. Moreover Richard granted for himself and his heirs that 
they will warrant the messuage to John and his heirs against all men, 
for ever. For this, John gave to Richard 100 shillings of silver. 

(132) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
John son of Robert de Tarente and Matilda his wife, querents, and 
Richard de Caleshale and Cecilia his wife, deforciants, of 6 messuages 
and I hide of land in Tarente Preston. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Richard and Cecilia acknowledged the tenements to be the 
right of John, and remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of 
Richard, to John and Matilda and the heirs of John, for ever. For 
this John and Matilda gave to Richard and Cecilia 10 marcs of 
silver. 



296 Dorset Fines. 



12 Edward II. (1318-19). 

(133) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between William 
de Bares and Leticia his wife, querents, and Henry de la Nye and 
Isabella his wife, impedients, of a messuage, mill, land, 4s. of rent, 
and a rent of i pound of pepper and a moiety of i pound of cumin in 
Fromesfoghechurche and advowson of the church. Plea of warranty 
of deed was summoned. Henry and Isabella acknowledged the tene- 
ments and advowson to be the right of William, as those which he 
and Leticia had of their gift. To have and to hold to William and 
Leticia and the heirs of William, of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the said tenements and advowson, for ever. 
Moreover Henry and Isabella granted for themselves and the heirs of 
Isabella that they will warrant the tenements and advowson to William 
and Leticia and the heirs of William against all men, for ever. For 
this, William and Leticia gave to Henry and Isabella 40 marcs of 
silver. 

(134) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John 
Baptist, between John de Rocheford and Matilda his wife, querents,, 
by John de Briddeport in Matilda's place, and Nicholas de Chydiok, 
deforciant, of 4 messuages, 3 carucates and 2 virgates of land and 
30S. of rent in Wynterborn Whytchurche. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. John acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Nicholas. For this, Nicholas granted i messuage, 2 carucates of land 
and 20s. of rent of the aforesaid tenements, to John and Matilda, 
and rendered the same to them at the court. To have and to hold 
to John and Matilda and the heirs of John, of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. More- 
over Nicholas granted for himself and his heirs that i carucate of land 
and I OS. of rent which Agnes who was the wife of Ralph de Rocheford 
held in dower, and that i messuage and a moiety of i virgate of land 
which Ivo de Rocheford held for term of life, and that i messuage and 
a moiety of i virgate of land which William de Rocheford held for 
term of life, and that i messuage and a moiety of i virgate of land 
which Alan de Rocheford held for term of life, and also that a moiety 
of I virgate of land which Henry de Lortemere held for term of life of 
the inheritance of the said Nicholas in the said vill on the day this con- 
cord was made, and which after the deaths of Agnes, Ivo, William, 
Alan and Henry ought to revert to Nicholas and his heirs, should then 
wholly remain to John and Matilda and the heirs of John. To hoid^ 
together with the aforesaid tenements which remain to them by this 
fine, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
said tenements, for ever. This concord was made there being present 



12 Edward II, (1318-19). 297 

Ivo, William and Alan, who agreed thereto and did fealty to John and 
Matilda at the court. 

(135) At Westminster, in the morrow of Souls, between Adam Sop, 
querent, and Geoffrey son of Robert Iwein of Wynfredneburgh, deforci- 
ant, of a messuage and land in Wodestert. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. . Adam acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Geoffrey as by his gift. For this Geoffrey granted them to Adam and 
and rendered them to him at the Court. To have and to hold to Adam 
for life, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to those tenements ; with remainder after the death of Adam to Adam 
son of the said Adam, and the heirs of his body, to hold of the chief 
lords as aforesaid for ever ; with remainder should Adam son of Adam 
die without heir of his body to Cristiana, sister of Adam son of Adam, 
and the heirs of her body, to hold as aforesaid for ever ; with remainder 
should Cristiana die without heir of her body, to the right heirs of the 
said Adam Sop. To hold as aforesaid, for ever. 

(136) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Thomas 
de Aston, querent, and John le Purser of Shirburn and Amicia his 
wife, deforciants, of a messuage, land and 5 marcs of rent in Blakenot- 
ford and Chepingblanford. Plea of covenant was summoned. John 
and Amicia acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Thomas, 
and remitted them for themselves and the heirs of Amicia to Thomas 
and his heirs, for ever. Moreover they granted that they will warrant 
the same to Thomas and his heirs against all men for ever. For this 
Thomas granted that he and his heirs would render every year to John 
and Amicia during their lives, 6 marcs of silver, with power to distrain 
Thomas or his heirs in respect of the goods and chattels found on 
the premises should there be default in the payment of such rent and 
retain them until full payment of the arrears. After the deaths of John 
and Amicia, Thomas and his heirs shall be quit of the yearly payment, 
for ever. 

(137) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between John 
de la Stone and Petronilla his wife, querents, by William de Perret in 
their place, and Roger Attenasshe of Wodeton, deforciant, of a messu- 
age and land in A . . . enasshe, Doddehulle and Sheneheye in Merswode- 
naal. Plea of covenant was summoned. Roger acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of John, as those which he and Petronilla 
had by his gift. To have and to hold to John and Petronilla and the 
heirs of John, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to those tenements, for ever. Moreover Roger granted for himself and 
his heirs that they will warrant the tenements to John and Petronilla 
and the heirs of John against all men, for ever. For this, John and 
Petronilla gave to Roger 20 pounds sterling. 



298 Dorset Fines, 



(138) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between 
Nicholas Martyn and Margery his wife, querents, and William R . . . s 
deforciant, of 2 messuages, 2 mills, 4 carucates of land, and 20 shill- 
ings of rent and a rent of i pound of wax in Pudele Waltereston and 
Puleyneston. Plea of covenant was summoned. Nicholas acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of William as by his gift. For this, 
William granted them to Nicholas and Margery and rendered them to 
them at the court. To have and to hold to Nicholas and Margery and 
the heirs of Nicholas, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. 

(139) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between Ed- 
ward Shonke, querent, and Thomas de Ponyngton, deforciant, of 2 
messuages and land in Kyngesber. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Thomas acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Edward, as by 
his gift. To have and to hold to Edward and his heirs of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the said tenements, 
for ever. Moreover Thomas granted that he and his heirs will war- 
rant the tenements to Edward and his heirs against all men, for ever. 
For this, Edward gave to Thomas lo pounds sterling. 

(140) At Westminster, in the morrow of Souls, between Robert de 
Farendon, querent, and Richard de Farendon, deforciant, of 5 messu- 
ages, land, and 20s. of rent in Sutton Poyntz, Simondesbergh, and 
Lodres. Plea of covenant was summoned. Robert acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of Richard, as by his gift. For this, Richard 
granted them to Robert and rendered them to him at the court. To 
have and to hold to Robert for life, of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the said tenements. With remainder after 
his death, to Thomas son of Robert and the heirs of his body, to hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements, for ever. Should Thomas die without heir of his body, 
then the tenements wholly shall remain to the right heirs of Robert. 
To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. 

\Endorsed\ Henry de Roges, Nicholas de Chedington and John de 
Hornesbogh put in their claim. 

(141) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between 
Edward Renald of Brideport, querent, and Roger de Legh and Joan 
his wife, impedients, of 2 messuages and land in Estyep juxta 
Simondesbergh. Plea of warranty of deed was summoned. Roger 
and Joan acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Edward as by 
their gift. To have and to hold to Edward and his heirs of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for 
ever. Moreover Roger granted for himself and his heirs that they will 
warrant the tenements to Edward and his heirs against all men, for 



12 Edward II. (13 18-19). 299 

ever. For this, Edward gave to Roger and Joan 10 marcs of 
silver. 

(142) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Sl Michael^ 
between Robert de Bradeford and Joan his wife, querents, and Richard 
Alewy parson of the church of Chirystanton, deforciant, of a messuage, 
mill, land and 15s. of rent in Wyke, Bradeford, and Clifton Mabank. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Robert acknowledged the tenements 
to be the right of Richard, as by his gift. For this Richard granted 
them to Robert and Joan, and rendered them at the court. To have 
and to hold to Robert and Joan during their lives, of the chief lords of 
that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, with re- 
mainder after their deaths to Mabilla who was the wife of Simon de 
Bradeford and Robert son of Robert de Bradeford. To hold of the 
chief lords during their lives by the services belonging to the tenements, 
with remainder after their deaths to the right heirs of Robert de 
Bradeford. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. 

(143) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Richard 
Bartelmeu, querent, and John Bartelmeu of Shafton, deforciant, of a 
messuage and land in Shafton. Plea of covenant was summoned 
between them. John acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Richard as by his gift. For this Richard granted them to John and 
rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to John during his 
life, of Richard and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly a rose at feast 
of the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service &amp;c, and doing therefor 
to the chief lords of that fee for Richard and his heirs all other services 
which belong to those tenements. With remainder after John's death, 
to Emma daughter of William Sperhauk, to hold of Richard Bartelmeu 
and his heirs as aforesaid. With remainder after Emma's death, to 
Richard son of the said John and the heirs of his body, to hold of Richard 
Bartelmeu and his heirs as aforesaid, for ever. Should Richard son of John 
die without heir of his body, then the remainder is to Thomas his brother 
and the heirs of his body. To hold of Richard Bartelmeu and his heirs^ 
as aforesaid, for ever. Should Thomas die without heir of his body^ 
then the remainder is to William his brother and the heirs of his body. 
To hold of Richard Bartelmeu and his heirs, as aforesaid, for ever. 
Should William die without heir of his body, then the tenements wholly 
shall revert to the aforesaid Richard Bartelmeu and his heirs quit of the 
other heirs of John, Emma, Richard, Thomas and William. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements, for ever. 

(144) At Westminster, fifteen days after Easter day, between 
Richard Slyk, clerk, querent, and Robert Traygnel and Joan his wife, 
deforciants, of a messuage and land in Loscumbe and Porton juxta 



;oo Dorset Fines. 



Porstok. Plea of covenant was summoned. Robert and Joan acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of Richard, and remitted the 
same for themselves and the heirs of Robert to Richard and his heirs 
for ever. Moreover Robert granted for himself and his heirs that they 
will warrant the tenements to Richard and his heirs against all men, 
for ever. For this, Richard gave to Robert and Joan lo pounds 
sterling. 

\Endorsed^ John son of William le Gardiner put in his claim. 

13. Edward II. (1319-20). 

(145) At York, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, between 
Geoffrey de Wermwelle, querent, by Philip Payn in his place, and 
Ralph de Boclaunde, deforciant, of a messuage, mill, land, and 100 shil- 
lings of rent in Wermwelle and the advowson of the church. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Ralph granted the tenements and advowson 
to Geoffrey and rendered them to him at the court. To have and to 
hold to Geoffrey during his life, of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the tenements and advowson. With remainder 
after his death to John son of Geoffrey, and Joan his wife and the heirs 
of their bodies. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. 
With remainder, should John and Joan die without heir of their bodies, 
to the right heirs of the said John. To hold of the chief lords, as 
aforesaid, for ever. For this, Geoffrey gave to Ralph 60 pounds sterling. 

(146) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Hugh Poyntz and Margaret his wife, querents, by Geoffrey de Shirburn, 
in Margaret's place, and Nicholas Poyntz, deforciant, of a messuage, 
land, and 100 shillings of rent in Stoke St. Edwold and Batecombe. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Hugh acknowledged the tenements to 
be the right of Nicholas as by his gift. For this, Nicholas granted them 
to Hugh and Margaret and rendered them at the court. To have and 
to hold to Hugh and Margaret and the heirs of Hugh, of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(147) At York, in the octaves of St. Michael, between William de 
Forstereshegh and Katerina his wife, querents, by John de Chiddelegh 
in Katerina's place, and Laurence de Forstereshegh and Isabella his 
wife, deforciants, of a messuage and land in Hermenneshegh and La 
Rode. Plea of covenant was summoned. William acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of Laurence. For this, Laurence and Isa- 
bella granted them to William and Katerina and rendered them at the 
court. To have and to hold to William and Katerina and the heirs of 
their bodies, of Laurence and Isabella and the heirs of Laurence, for 
ever, rendering therefor yearly a rose at feast of the Nativity of 



13 Edward IL (1319-20). 301 

St. John Baptist for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for Laurence and Isabella and the heirs of Laurence 
all other services which belong to the tenements for ever. Should 
William and Katerina die without heir of their bodies, then the tene- 
ments wholly shall revert to Laurence and Isabella and the heirs of 
Laurence quit of the other heirs of William and Katerina. To hold of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tene- 
ments, for ever. 

(148) At York, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Laurence de 
Forstereshegh and Isabella his wife, querents, and Stephen de North- 
wode, vicar of the church of Wytthechurche, deforciant, of a messuage, 
land and \ penny of rent in Forstereshegh. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Laurence acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Stephen, as by his gift. For this, Stephen granted them to Laurence 
and Isabella and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to 
Laurence and Isabella during their lives, of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to those tenements. With remainder 
after the deaths of Laurence and Isabella to William son of the same 
Laurence and the heirs of his body. To hold of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. With 
remainder, should William die without heir of his body, to the right 
heirs of Laurence. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(149) At York, one month after the day of St. Michael, between 
John de Childecombe and Margery his wife, querents, and Thomas de 
Farendon, deforciant, of a messuage and land in Frome Belet, West 
Stanorde and Fordington juxta Dorcestre. Flea of covenant was 
summoned. John acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Thomas, as by his gift. For this, Thomas granted them to John and 
Margery and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to John 
and Margery and the heirs of John of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to those tenements. 

(150) At York, one month after the day of St. Michael, between 
Thomas de la See and Joan his wife, querents, and William le Moyngne, 
parson of the church of Ore, deforciant, of 2 messuages, land and 20 
shillings of rent in Osmyngton and Sutton. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Thomas acknowledged the tenements to be the right 
of William, as by his gift. For this William granted them to Thomas 
and Joan and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to 
Thomas and Joan and the heirs of Thomas of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(151) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John de Ceme, senior, and Isabella his wife, querents, and Henry de. 

20 



302 Dorset Fines. 



Cerne, clerk, deforciant, of a messuage, land and 50 shillings of rent in 
Upmelcumbe. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of Henry, as by his gift For this, 
Henry granted them to John and Isabella, and rendered them at 
the court. To have and to hold to John and Isabella during their 
lives, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
those tenements, with remainder after their deaths to John son of 
John de Cerne and Margaret his wife and the heirs of John. To. hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements, for ever. 

(152) At York, one month after the day of St. Michael, between 
Roesia who was the wife of John de Boys, querent, and John de 
Childecombe, junior, deforciant, of a messuage, land and 20 shillings 
of rent in Westwode juxta Cumberkaynes and Westburton. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. Roesia acknowledged the tenements to 
be the right of John as by her gift. For this John granted them to 
her and tendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Roesia 
during her life, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements. With remainder after her death to Laurence 
de Boys and Matilda daughter of the aforesaid John, and the heirs 
which Laurence shall beget by Matilda, to hold of the chief lords as 
aforesaid, for ever. Should Laurence die without heir by Matilda, 
then after both their deaths the tenements shall wholly remain to 
the right heirs of Roesia. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, 
for ever. 

[Endorsed.] Elena who was the wife of William de Boys put in 
her claim. 

(153) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between Henry de la Hyde, querent, and John le Portir and Alice his 
wife, deforciants, of a toft, land, and pasture for certain cattle in 
Pymperne. Plea of covenant was summoned. John and Alice ac- 
knowledged the tenements and pasture to be the right of Henry, and 
rendered them to him at the court. To have and to hold to Henry 
and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the tenements and pasture for ever. Moreover John and Alice 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Alice that they will warrant 
the tenements and pasture to Henry and his heirs against all men, 
for ever. For this Henry gave to John and Alice 20 marcs of silver. 

14 Edward IL (1320-21). 

(154) At Westminster, one month after the day of St Michael, 
between John Peytevyn and Joel de la HauUe, querents, and William 
de la Haulle, deforciant, of a messuage, a toft, and land in Deuelish 



14 Edward I L (1320-21). 303 

and Frome. Plea of covenant was summoned, William acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of John, as those which he and 
Joel had by his (William's) gift. To have and to hold to John and Joel 
and the heirs of John, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to those tenements, for ever. Moreover William granted for 
himself and his heirs that they will warrant the tenements to John 
and Joel and the heirs of John against all men, for ever. For this, 
John and Joel gave to William 20 pounds sterling. 

(155) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. Martin, between John 
Mautravers, junior, querent, and Nicholas de Laybrok and Margaret 
his wife, deforciants, of a messuage, mill, land and i8s. 4d. rent in 
Upwymboum All Saints. Plea of covenant was summoned. John 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Margaret. For this 
Nicholas and Margaret granted the tenements to John and rendered 
them to him at the court. To have and to hold to John and his heirs 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the said 
tenements, for ever. 

[Endorsed,] John Payn put in his claim. 

(156) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, 
between Richard son of John de Derneford and Cristina his wife, 
querents, and Alexander de Wanden, parson of the church of Worthe, 
deforciant, of a messuage and land in Langeton juxta Corf Castel. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Richard acknowledged the tene- 
ments to be the right of Alexander, as by his gift. For this, Alexander 
granted the tenements to Richard and Cristina and rendered them at 
the court. To have and to hold to Richard and Cristina and the heirs 
of Richard, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the tenements, for ever. 

(157) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Michael, 
between Henry de la Hyde, querent, and John de Wroxkeshale and 
Alice his wife, deforciants, of a messuage, land and 20s. of rent in 
Upwymbume, Fyme, Thornhull, Leghe, Pyterichesham, Kyngeston, 
Cugrove, Bernardesle, Knolton, Hamme, Preston, and Hamme Cham- 
berlayn, except 15 acres of land in Thornhull. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. John and Alice acknowledged the tenements to be the 
right of Henry, and remitted the same to him and his heirs, from 
themselves and the heirs of Alice, for ever. For this Henry granted 
for himself and his heirs that they would render every year to John 
and Alice during their lives, 7 marcs of silver, with power for John 
and Alice to distrain Henry and his heirs and those who henceforth 
shall hold the tenements, if there be arrears of the rent, until full pay- 
ment thereof. After the decease of John and Alice, Henry and his 
heirs shall be quit of the said yearly payment, for ever. 



304 Dorset Fines. 



(158) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Robert 
fitz Payn and Ela his wife, querents, by William de Perret in Ela's 
place, and John de Gary, deforciant, of a carucate of land in Suthgarston 
and of the manors of Worth and Ocford fitz Payn and the advowsons 
of the churches of those manors. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Robert acknowledged the tenements and advowsons to be the right of 
John, as by his gift. For this, John granted them to Robert and Ela, 
and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Robert and 
Ela and their heirs male, of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the tenements and advowsons, with remainder after 
the deaths of Robert and Ela and in default of such heir male, to the 
right heirs of Robert. To hold of the chief lords as aforesaid, for 
ever. 

(159) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between John 
Dygun and Amidonea his wife, querents, by William de Perret in 
Amedonea's place, and Thomas de Axeministre, deforciant, of 2 mes- 
suages and I carucate of land in Dalwode. Plea of covenant was. 
summoned. John acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Thomas, as by his gift. For this, Thomas granted them to John and 
Amidonea and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to- 
John and Amidonea and the heirs of John of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. Thomas 
and his heirs will warrant the tenements to John and Amidonea and 
the heirs of John against all men, for ever. 

(160) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between John 
de Canefard, querent, and Henry de Berewyk and Matilda his wife, 
deforciants, of a messuage in Shafton. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. John acknowledged the messuage to be the right of Henry. 
For this Henry and Matilda granted it to John and rendered it at the 
court. To have and to hold to John and his heirs, of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the messuage, for ever. 
Moreover Henry and his heirs will warrant the messuage to John and 
his heirs against all men, for ever. 

(161) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between Bar- 
tholomew Payn and Matilda his wife, querents, by John Payn in 
Matilda's place, and Richard Payn, deforciant, of the manor of Stoure 
Ores-cuth, and land in Gussyth All Saints. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Bartholomew acknowledged the tenements to be the right 
of Richard, as by his gift. For this, Richard granted them to Bartho- 
lomew and Matilda and rendered them at the court. To have and to 
hold to Bartholomew and Matilda and the heirs of Bartholomew, of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tene- 
ments, for ever. 



1 4 Edward II. (13 20-2 1 ). 305 

(162) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between John 
Le Latymer and Joan his wife, querents, and Lambert de Thrikyngham, 
deforciant, of the manors of Divelish, Duntysh and Tylleye. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. John and Joan acknowledged the manors to 
be the right of Lambert as by their gift. For this Lambert granted them 
to John and Joan and rendered them at the court. To have and to 
hold to John and Joan and the heirs of their bodies, of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the said manors, for ever. 
Should John and Joan die without heir of their bodies then the manors 
wholly will remain to the right heirs of John, to hold of the chief lords 
as aforesaid, for ever. 

(163) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
William Thomelyn and Agnes his wife, querents, and Gunnilda daughter 
of William Cole, of Wynterborne St. Martin, deforciant, of 2 messuages 
and 40 acres of land in Wynterborne St. Martin. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Gunnilda acknowledged the tenements to be the 
right of William and rendered them at the court. To have and to 
hold to William and Agnes and the heirs of William, of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the said tenements for ever. 
Moreover Gunnilda granted for herself and her heirs that they will 
warrant the tenements to William and Agnes and the heirs of William 
against all men, for ever. For this, William and Agnes gave to Gun- 
nilda 40 marcs of silver. 

(164) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Trinity, between Thomas 
son of Hillary de Bire, querent, and Hillary de Bire, deforciant, of a 
messuage, land and 40s. rent in Bire. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Hillary acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Thomas as by 
his gift. For this Thomas granted them to Hillary and rendered them 
at the court. To have and to hold to Hillary during his life, of Thomas 
and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly a rose at feast of Nativity of St. 
John Baptist for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords of 
that fee for Thomas and his heirs all other services which belong* to 
the said tenements. After the death of Hillary the tenements wholly 
shall revert to Thomas and his heirs quit of the heirs of Hillary, to 
hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
tenements, for ever. 

(165) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Robert Golde, querent, and John Golde and Joan his wife, deforciants, 
of a messuage and land in Drempton. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Robert acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Joan. 
For this, John and Joan granted them to Robert, and rendered them 
at the court. To have and to hold to Robert and his heirs, of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements, for 



3o6 Dorset Fines. 



ever. John and Joan and the heirs of Joan will warrant the tenements 
to Robert and his heirs against all men, for ever. 

(i66) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
John de Lucy and Margaret his wife, querents, by Walter de Brunesdon 
guardian of the said Margaret, and Master Ralph Cokerel of Fernham 
deforciant, of a messuage, land and iios. rent and a moiety of a mill 
in Yest Hamme, Wymbournemenstre, Leygh, Parva Caneford, and 
Hammepreston and the advowson of the chapel of Hammepreston. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknowledged the tenements 
and advowson to be the right of Master Ralph, as by his gift. For 
this, Master Ralph granted them to John and Margaret and rendered 
them at the court. To have and to hold to John and Margaret and 
the heirs of their bodies, of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the tenements and advowson, for ever. Should John 
and Margaret die without heir of their bodies, the tenements and 
advowson will wholly remain to the right heirs of John. To hold of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements 
and advowson, for ever. 

15 Edward II. (1321-22). 

(167) At Westminster, on the morrow of Souls, between Peter de 
Rabayn and Elizabeth his wife querents, by the said Peter in Elizabeth's 
place, and John Doudeswell, deforciant, of 12 messuages and land in 
Edmundesham. Plea of covenant was summoned. Peter acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of John, as by his gift. For this 
John granted the tenements to Peter and Elizabeth and rendered them 
at the court. To have and to hold to Peter and Elizabeth and the 
heirs of their bodies, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. Should Peter and Elizabeth die 
without heir of their bodies, then the tenements wholly will remain to 
John de Horneby and his heirs. To hold of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to the said tenements, for ever. 

(168) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, 
between Richard Chelke, querent, and John Cokyn and Sibilla his wife, 
deforciants, of a messuage in Shafton. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. John and Sibilla acknowledged the messuage to be the right 
of Richard, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Richard and his 
heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
messuage, for ever. Moreover they will warrant the same for them- 
selves and the heirs of Sibilla, to Richard and his heirs, against all 
men for ever. For this, Richard gave to John and Sibilla 40 shillings 
of silver. 



1 6 Edward II. (1322-23). 307 

16 Edward II. (1322-23). 

(169) At York, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, between 
Robert son of Paegn and Ela his wife, querents, by Walter Benyon in 
Ela's place, and Jordan de Byntre, chaplain, deforciant, of a messuage 
and land in Southgarston juxta Acford Alfred and the manor of Frome 
Whitefeld and advowson of the church of that manor. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Robert acknowledged the tenements and advowson 
to be the right of Jordan, of which the messuage and land were by 
Robert's gift. For this Jordan granted the messuage and land to 
Robert and Ela and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold 
to Robert and Ela and the heirs male of their bodies, of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the said messuage and land, 
for ever. Moreover Jordan granted for himself and his heirs that the 
manor and advowson aforesaid, which Juliana de Storton held for term 
of life, of his inheritance, on the day this concord was made and which 
after her death ought to revert to him (Jordan) and his heirs, should 
then wholly remain to Robert and Ela and their heirs aforesaid. To 
hold, together with the tenements which remain to them by this fine, 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to such manor 
and advowson, for ever. Should Robert and Ela die without heir male 
of their bodies, then all the tenements and advowson, as is aforesaid, 
shall wholly remain to the right heirs of Robert. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements and 
advowson. 

(170) At York, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Peter 
Rabayn and Elizabeth his wife, querents, and William de Armynne, 
clerk, deforciant, of the manors of Waye and Pudle. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Peter acknowledged the manors to be the right of 
William, as by his gift. For this, William granted them to Peter and 
Elizabeth and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to 
Peter and Elizabeth and the heirs of their bodies, of the King and his 
heirs, by the services which belong to the said manors, for ever. 
Should Peter and Elizabeth die without heir of their bodies, then the 
manors wholly will remain to the right heirs of Peter. To hold of the 
King and his heirs by the services which belong to the manors, for 
ever. This concord was made by precept of the King. 

(171) At York, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between John de 
Godmanston and Joan his wife, querents, by Thomas de Lucteswell in 
Joan's place, and Robert le Taillour of Upsydelyng, deforciant, of the 
manor of Godmanston. Plea of covenant was summoned. John ac- 
knowledged the manor to be the right of Robert, as by his gift. For 
this, Robert granted the manor to John and rendered it at the court. 



3o8 Dorset Fines, 



To have and to hold to John and Joan and the heirs of their bodies, of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the manor. 
Should John and Joan die without heir of their bodies, then the manor 
wholly shall remain to the right heir of John. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the said manor, for 
. ever. 

(172) At York, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between Simon 
de St. Quintin, querent, and Robert le Taillour de Upsydeling, defor- 
ciant, of 2 messuages, i mill, land, 2s. id. rent and a rent of i pound 
of cummin in Fifhide Seint Quyntyn and Fifhide Nevill. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Simon acknowledged the tenements to be 
the right of Robert as by his gift. For this Robert granted them to 
Simon and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Simon 
during his life, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the tenements ; with remainder after his death to John de Godman- 
ston and Joan his wife and the heirs of their bodies. To hold of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements. 
Should John and Joan die without heir of their bodies, then the tene- 
ments wholly will remain to the right heirs of Simon. To hold of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenements, 
for ever. 

\Endorsed^ Henry Seint Quenteyn put in his claim. 

(173) At York, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, between 
John de Holte, querent, and Joan who was the wife of Nicholas de 
Sancta Elena, deforciant, of a messuage, land and 4s. of rent in Tarente 
Loueton. Plea of covenant was summoned. Joan acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of John and rendered 2 parts thereof to him 
at the court. To have and to hold to John and his heirs of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 2 parts, for ever. 
Moreover Joan granted for herself and her heirs that the third part of 
the tenements which Alice who was the wife of Thomas de Loueton 
held in dower of the inheritance of the said Joan in the said vill, on the 
day this concord was made and which after the death of Alice ought to 
revert to Joan and her heirs, should then wholly remain to John and 
his heirs. To hold together with the said 2 parts which remain to him 
by this fine, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to that third part, for ever. And Joan and her heirs will warrant the 
tenements to John and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this, 
John gave to Joan . . . (faded) marcs of silver. 

(174) At York, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, between 
Robert de Okeston, querent, and Robert de Uppehey, deforciant, of a 
messuage, land and 40s. of rent in la Wyle juxta Lym. Plea of cove- 
nant was summoned. Robert de Uppehey acknowledged the tenements 



\^ Edward II, (1323-24). 309 

to be the right of Robert de Okeston as by his gift. For this, 
Robert de Okeston granted them to Robert de Uppeheye. To have 
and to hold to him for his Hfe, of Robert de Okeston and his heirs, 
rendering therefor yearly a rose at Nativity of St. John Baptist, for 
all service &amp;c., and doing therefor for Robert de Okeston and his 
heirs, to the chief lords of that fee all other services which belong to 
those tenements. After his death the tenements wholly will remain to 
William son of Walter de Uppeheye and Cristiana his wife and the 
heirs of their bodies. To hold of Robert de Okeston and his heirs 
by the said service for ever. Should William and Cristiana die with- 
out heir of their bodies, then the tenements wholly will revert to 
Robert de Okeston and his heirs quit of the heirs of Robert de 
Uppehey and also of the other heirs of William and Cristiana. To 
hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
the tenements, for ever. 

17 Edward II. (1323-24). 

(175) At York, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, between 
John de Kary, querent, and John Golde and Joan his wife, deforciants, 
of a messuage and land in Stoke Waleis which Stephen de Chidiok 
holds for term of life. Plea of covenant was summoned. John and 
Joan acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John de Kary, 
and granted for themselves and the heirs of Joan, that the lands which 
Stephen held for life by lease (ex dimissione) of John and Joan on the 
day this concord was made and which after his death ought to revert to 
them and the heirs of Joan, should then wholly remain to John de Kary 
and his heirs. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the tenements, for ever. John and Joan and the heirs 
of Joan will warrant the tenements to John de Kary and his heirs, 
against all men, for ever. For this, John de Kary gave to John and 
Joan twenty marcs of silver. 

(176) At York, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Edmund 
Gasceleyn, querent, and William Gascelyn and John his brother, 
deforciants, of a messuage, land and 50s. of rent in Peterychesham and 
Hynetone Martel. Plea of covenant was summoned. William and John 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Edmund as by their 
gift. For this, Edmund granted them to William, and rendered them 
at the court. To have and to hold to William for his life, of Edmund 
and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly a rose at feast of Nativity of 
St. John Baptist for all services &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief 
lords of that fee for Edmund and his heirs all other services which 
l)elong to the tenements, with remainder, after William's death to the 



310 Dorset Fines, 



aforesaid John. To hold for his life, of Edmund and his heirs by 
the aforesaid services, with reversion, after his death, to Edmund and 
his heirs, quit of the heirs of William and John. To hold of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements, for ever. 

(177) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilar}v 
between Thomas de Cranthorn, querent, and John de Oskereswille,. 
deforciant, of a messuage, land and lOOs. of rent, and one knight's 
fee in Oskereswille, Okerdone and Porton and the advowson of the 
church of Oskereswille. Plea of covenant was summoned. John 
acknowledged the tenements and advowson to be the right of Thomas, 
and rendered them to him at the court. To have and to hold to 
Thomas and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the said tenements and advowson, for ever. More- 
over John granted that he and his heirs will warrant the tenements 
and advowson to Thomas and his heirs against all men for ever. For 
this, Thomas gave to John ;^ioo sterling. 

(178) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord,, 
between Peter Selewode and Alianora his wife, querents, and John 
Le Flemyng senior, and Alice his wife, deforciants, of a messuage 
in Shafton. Plea of covenant was summoned. John and Alice ac- 
knowledged the messuage to be the right of Alianora as that which she 
and Peter had by their gift. To have and to hold to Peter and Alianora 
and the heirs of Alianora of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the said messuage for ever. Moreover John and Alice 
and the heirs of Alice will warrant the messuage to Peter and Alianora 
and the heirs of Alianora against all men for ever. For this, Peter and 
Alianora gave to John and Alice loos. of silver. 

(179) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
Robert Golde of Sanputte, querent, by Thomas de Lutteswell in his. 
place, and John Cole de Brodewyndesore and Agnes his wife, deforciants,, 
of 3 messuages and land in Brodewyndesore. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. John and Agnes acknowledged the tenements to be the 
right of Robert, as by their gift. To have and to hold to Robert and 
his heirs, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the tenements, for ever. Moreover John and Agnes and the heirs of 
Agnes will warrant the tenements to Robert and his heirs against 
all men, for ever. For this, Robert gave to John and Agnes ,7.0^ 
sterling. 

(180) At Westminster, in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between 
Walter de Lewestone and Joan his wife, querents, by Thomas de 
Lutteswelle in Joan's place, and Robert de Bradeford junior, deforciant, 
of the manor of Lewestone. Plea of covenant was summoned. Walter 
acknowledged the manor to be the right of Robert as by his gift. For 



i8 Edward 11. (1324-25). 311 

this, Robert granted the manor to Walter and Joan and rendered the 
same at the court To have and to hold to Walter and Joan and the 
heirs of their bodies, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the said manor, for ever. Should Walter and Joan die 
without heir of their bodies, then the manor wholly shall remain to 
the right heirs of Walter. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to the manor for ever. 

18 Edward II. (1324-25). 

(181) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, 
between John de Mere and Alianora his wife, querents, by William de 
Cristeschurch in their places^ and John Wake of Gussich, deforciant, of 
a messuage, land and 20s. of rent in Langenham and Gyllyngham. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. John Wake granted the tenements 
to John de Mere and Alianora and rendered them at the court. To 
have and to hold to John de Mere and Alianora during their lives, of 
the chief lords of that fee, with remainder after their deaths to Roger de 
Buttesthorn and Margaret his wife and the heirs of their bodies. To 
have and to hold of the chief lords of that fee, for ever. Should Roger 
and Margaret die without heir of their bodies, then the tenements 
wholly shall revert to the right heirs of John de Mere. To hold of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the tene- 
ments, for ever. 

(182) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Henry 
le Guldene, querent, and Geoffrey de Pipelepenne and Joan his wife 
deforciants, of a messuage, land and i8s. of rent in Shirebourne. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. Geoffrey and Joan acknowledged the 
tenements to be the right of Henry, and rendered them to him at the 
court. To have and to hold to Henry and his heirs of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements, for ever. 
Moreover Geoffrey granted for himself and his heirs that they will 
warrant the tenements to Henry and his heirs against all men, for 
ever. For this, Henry gave to Geoffrey and Joan 100 marcs of silver. 

(183) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between 
Nicholas de Cottele and Isabella his wife, querents, by Thomas de 
Lutteswell in Isabella's place, and Henry de Stratton, deforciant, of a 
messuage and land in Wydihok'. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Nicholas acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Henry, as by 
his gift. For this, Henry granted them to Nicholas and Isabella and 
rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Nicholas and 
Isabella and the heirs of Nicholas, of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to said tenements, for ever. 



Dorset Fines, 



(184) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between John 
de Childheigh and Emma his wife, querents, by John Hurt in Emma's 
place, and William Le Hauk and Alice his wife, deforciants, of a messu- 
age in Shirebourn. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknow- 
ledged the messuage to be the right of Alice. For this, William and 
Alice granted it to John and Emma and rendered it at the court. To 
have and to hold to John and Emma and the heirs of John, of the chief 
lords of that fee by tl\e services which belong to the messuage, for ever. 
William and his heirs will warrant the same to John and Emma and 
the heirs of John against all men, for ever. 

(185) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Nicholas Jordan of Childeheigh, querent, and . 
John Duket and Matilda his wife, deforciants, of a messuage and land 
in Drempton. Plea of covenant was summoned. John and Matilda 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Nicholas, and remitted 
the same for themselves and the heirs of Matilda to Nicholas and his 
heirs, for ever. For this, Nicholas gave to John and Matilda lo marcs 
of silver. 

(186) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Hilary, 
between Edmund de Plecy and Matilda his wife, querents, and 
William de Lutleton, vicar of the church of Caneford, and Walter 
Fraunkeleyn, deforciants, of the advowson of the church of the mandr 
of Upwymburne and 2 parts of the same manor. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Edmund acknowledged the advowson and 2 parts 
to be the right of William, as those which he and Walter have by 
his (Edmund's) gift. For this, William and Walter granted the same 
to Edmund and Matilda and rendered them at the court. To have and 
to hold to Edmund and Matilda and the heirs of their bodies, of the 
chief lords of that fee, by the services which belong to the said advow- 
son and 2 parts, for ever. Should Edmund and Matilda die without 
heir of their bodies, then the advowson and 2 parts wholly shall remain 
to the right heirs of Edmund. To hold of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to the advowson and 2 parts, for ever. 

(187) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of Holy Trinity, 
between Peter de Rabayn and Isabella his wife, querents, by William 
de Peret in Isabella's place, and Roger le Gulden, deforciant, of the 
manors of Waye and Pudele. Plea of covenant was summoned. Peter 
acknowledged the manors to be the right of Roger, as by his gift. For 
this, Roger granted them to Peter and Isabella and rendered them at 
the court. To have and to hold to Peter and Isabella and the heirs of 
their bodies, of the King and his heirs, by the services which belong to 
the manors, for ever, with remainder, should Peter and Isabella die 
without heir of their bodies, to the right heirs of Peter. To hold of 



19 Edward I L (1325-26). 313. 

the King, as aforesaid. This concord was made by precept of the 
King. 

(1B8) At Westminster, on the morrow of St John Baptist, between 
Richard de N)rweton and Dionisia his wife, querents, and John Goude 
and Alice his wife, deforciants, of 2 messuages in Shafton. Plea ot 
covenant was summoned. John and Alice acknowledged the messuages 
to be the right of Richard, as those which he and Dionisia had by their 
gift. To have and to hold to Richard and Dionisia and the heirs of 
Richard, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong ta 
the messuages, for ever. Moreover John granted for himself and his 
heirs that they will warrant the messuages to Richard and Dionisia 
and the heirs of Richard, against all men, for ever. For this, Richard 
and Dionisia gave to John and Alice 10 marcs of silver. 

(189) At Westminster, on the morrow of St. John Baptist, between 
John Goude, querent, and John Sterman and Benedicta his wife, de- 
forciants, of land in Shafton. Plea of covenant was summoned. The 
deforciants acknowledged the land to be the right of John Goude, as 
by their gift. To have and to hold to him and his heirs, of the chief 
lords of that fee, by the services which belong to that land for ever. 
Moreover they and their heirs will warrant the same to John Goude 
and his heirs against all men, for ever. For this, John Goude gave 
to John Sterman and Benedicta 100 shillings of silver. 

(190) At Westminster in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John son of John de Hanle, querent, by Thomas de Frementel in his 
place, and John de Hanle, deforciant, of a messuage, land and 16 pence 
of rent in Hanle juxta Craneburn. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
The deforciant acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John 
son of John, as by his gift. To have and to hold to John son of John 
and his heirs, of the chief lords of that fee, by the services which belong 
to the tenements, for ever. For this, John son of John gave to John 
de Hanle 100 marcs of silver. 

19 Edward II. (1325-26). 

(191) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Martin,, 
between Edmund de Plecy and Matilda his wife, querents, and John de 
Gredelington, chaplain, deforciant, of 20 messuages, i mill and land in 
Kenstaneston and Parkeston. Plea of covenant was summoned. Ed- 
mund acknowledged the tenements to be the right of John, as by his 
gift. For this, John granted the tenements to Edmund and Matilda 
and rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Edmund and 
Matilda during their lives, of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, with remainder after the deaths of 



;i4 Dorset Fines, 



Edmund and Matilda, to Nicholas son of the said Edmund and the 
heirs of his body. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, for ever ; with remainder, should 
Nicholas die without heir of his body, to the right heirs of the said 
Edmund. To hold, as aforesaid. 

(193) At Westminster, three weeks after the day of St. Michael, 
between John le Moigne and Edith his wife, querents, and Robert 
Belet, deforciant, of 5 messuages, land, and one-third part of a mill 
in Gaulton. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknowledged 
the tenements to be the right of Robert, as by his gift. For this, Robert 
granted the tenements to John and Edith and rendered them at the 
court. To have and to hold to John and Edith and the heirs of their 
bodies, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
those tenements, for ever ; with remainder, should John and Edith die 
without heir of their bodies, to the right heirs of John. To hold of the 
chief lords, as aforesaid. 

(193) At Westminster, one month after the day of St. Michael, 
between Thomas Platel, querent, and John de Funtel, deforciant, of 2 
messuages in Shafton. Plea of covenant was summoned. John ac- 
knowledged the messuages to be the right of Thomas, and rendered 
them at the court. To have and to hold to Thomas and his heirs, of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the messuages, 
for ever. Moreover, John granted that he and his heirs will warrant 
the messuages to Thomas and his heirs against all men for ever. For 
this, Thomas gave to John 100 shillings of silver. 

(194) At Westminster, on the morrow of Souls, between John de 
Byngham and Avicia his wife, querents, and Joan de Byngham, de- 
forciant, of I messuage, i mill, land, and 5s. of rent in Woth' Chamiel 
juxta Brideport. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of Joan, as by his gift. For this 
she granted them to John and Avice and rendered them at the court. 
To have and to hold to John and Avice and the heirs of their bodies, 
of the chief lords of that fee, by the services which belong to the tene - 
ments, for ever ; with remainder, should John and Avice die without 
heir of their bodies, to John de Loveny and the heirs of his body 
begotten, to hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid ; with remainder, 
should John de Loveny die without heir of his body begotten to the 
right heirs of John de Byngham. To hold of the chief lords, as 
aforesaid. 

[Endorsed.] Henry de Welles, heir of John de Badisle, put in his 
claim. 

(195) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between Walter Hering', querent, and Wibert de Litleton, deforciant. 



19 Edward II. (1325-26). 315 

of I messuage, land and 12s. of rent in Cherleton and Chermynstre 
juxta Dors' [Dorchester]. Plea of covenant was summoned. Walter 
acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Wibert, as by his gift. 
For this, Wibert granted the tenements to Walter and rendered them 
at the court. To have and to hold to Walter during his life, of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those tenemeuts ; 
with remainder, after Walter's decease, to Adam Glyde and Elizabeth 
his wife and the heirs of their bodies, to hold of the chief lords, as afore- 
said ; with remainder, should Adam and Elizabeth die without heir of 
their bodies, to the right heirs of Adam. To hold of the chief lords, as 
aforesaid. 

(196) At Westminster, in the octaves of St Hilary, between Thomas 
Platel, querent, and John Cokyn and Sibilla his wife, deforciants, of a 
messuage in Shafton. Plea of covenant was summoned. John and 
Sibilla acknowledged the messuage to be the right of Thomas and 
remitted it for themselves and the heirs of John, to Thomas and his 
heirs, for ever. Moreover John granted that he and his heirs will 
warrant the messuage to Thomas and his heirs against all men for 
ever. For this, Thomas gave to John and Sibilla 100 shillings of 
silver. 

(197) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Purification of the 
Blessed Mary, between Agnes who was the wife of Godfrey de la 
B . . . ne, querent, and Thomas le Taillur de Stoure and Isabella his 
wife, deforciants, of a messuage in Shafton. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Thomas and Isabella acknowledged the messuage to be 
the right of Agnes and rendered the same at the court. To have and 
to hold to Agnes and her heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to that messuage, for ever. Moreover they 
granted for themselves and the heirs of Isabella that they will warrant 
the messuage to Agnes and her heirs against all men, for ever. For 
this Agnes gave to Thomas and Isabella 100 shillings of silver. 

(198) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between 
William de Benham and Edith his wife, querents, by John de Stanord 
in Edith's place, and William le Moigne, parson of the church of Oure, 
deforciant, of a messuage, land, 9s. of rent, and a rent of a moiety of a 
pound of cumin in Wynterburn Nicholeston and the advowson of the 
church. Plea of covenant was summoned. William de Benham ack- 
nowledged the tenements and advowson to be the right of William le 
Moigne as by his gift. For this William le Moigne granted them to 
William de Benham and Edith and rendered them at the court. To 
have and to hold to William de Benham and Edith and the heirs of 
William of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to 
the said tenements and advowson, for ever. 



3i6 Dorset Fines, 



\Endorsed?[ Nicholas de la Lude put in his claim. 

(199) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between John le 
Moigne and Edith his wife, querents, and William le Clavile, deforciant, 
of a messuage, land and 40s. of rent in* Pudele Turburvile. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. John acknowledged the tenements to be the 
right of William. For this, William granted for himself and his heirs, 
that the said tenements which William le Moigne parson of the church 
of Oure held for term of life of the inheritance of the aforesaid William 
le Clavile on the day this concord was made, and which, after William 
le Moigne's death ought to revert to William le Clavile and his heirs, 
should then wholly remain to John and Edith and the heirs of their 
bodies. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements, for ever. Should John and Edith die without 
heir of their bodies, then the tenements wholly shall remain to the 
right heirs of John. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the tenements for ever. This concord was 
made, there being present William le Moigne who agreed thereto and 
did fealty to John and Edith at the court. 

\Endorsed^ John son of John le Moigne put in his claim. 

(200) At Westminster, in the morrow of Ascension of our Lord, 
between John de Miere, querent, and Richard Kynemere and Joan his 
wife, deforciants, of 30 acres of land in Shafton. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. Richard and Joan acknowledged the land to be the right 
of John, and remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Joan to 
John and his heirs for ever. For this John gave to Richard and Joan 
10 marcs of silver. 

(201) At Westminster, on the morrow of the Ascension of our 
Lord, between Alan de Wyke, querent, and Richard de Kynemere 
and Joan his wife, deforciants, of land in Shafton. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Richard and Joan acknowledged the land to be 
the right of Alan, and remitted the same for themselves and the 
heirs of Joan to Allan and his heirs, for ever. For this, Alan gave 
to Richard and Joan 100 shillings of silver. 

(202) At Westminster, one month after Easter day, between 
Thomas de Marleberge, querent, by William de Peret in his place, 
and William de Meleplessh and Joan his wife, deforciants, of 4 marcs 
of rent in Melebury Bubbe. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
William and Joan acknowledged the rent to be the right of Thomas, 
and remitted the same for themselves and the heirs of Joan to Thomas 
and his heirs, for ever. Moreover they granted that they will warrant 
the same to Thomas and his heirs against all men, for ever. For 
this Thomas gave to William and Joan 20 marcs of silver. 

(203) At Westminster, ^\t. weeks after Easter day, between Henry 



20 Edward II. (1326-27). 317 

de Gorton, querent, and Roger de La Dene and Matilda his wife, 
deforciants, of 2 messuages and land in Walteford, Chelbrigg and 
Wymboum Mynstre. Plea of covenant was summoned. Roger and 
Matilda acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Henry, as by 
their gift. For this, Henry granted the tenements to Roger and 
rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Roger during 
his life, of Henr&gt;' and his heirs, rendering therefor yearly one rose 
at Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, &amp;c., and doing therefor to 
the chief lords of the fee for Henry and his heirs all other services 
which belong to the tenements. After the decease of Roger the tene- 
ments wholly shall revert to Henry and his heirs quit of the heirs 
of Roger. To hold of the chief lords of the fee by the services which 
belong to those tenements, for ever. 

(204) At Westminster, three weeks after Easter day, between 
Stephen Loveraz and Alice his wife, querents, and Ingelramus Beren- 
ger, deforciant, of a moiety of the manor of Mordon. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Stephen and Alice acknowledged the moiety to be 
the right of Ingelramus. Of which, Ingelramus had 2 parts of the 
said moiety by the gift of Stephen and Alice. For this, Ingelramus 
granted to them the said 2 parts and rendered them at the court. 
To have and to hold to Stephen and Alice during their lives, of the 
King and his heirs, by the services which belong to the said 2 parts. 
Moreover Ingelramus granted for himself and his heirs that a third 
part of the aforesaid moiety which James de Molyns and Margaret 
his wife held as the dower of Margaret, of the inheritance of his 
(Ingelramus') inheritance, on the day this concord was made, and 
which after the death of Margaret ought to revert to Ingelramus and 
his heirs, should then wholly remain to Stephen and Alice. To hold 
together with the 2 parts which remain to them by this fine, of the King 
and his heirs by the services which belong to that third part, during the 
lives of Stephen and Alice. And after their deaths the said moiety 
shall wholly revert to Ingelramus and his heirs quit of the heirs of 
Stephen and Alice. To hold of the King and his heirs by the services 
which belong to the moiety for ever. This concord was made by 
precept of the King. 

20 Edward II. (1326-27). 

(205) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between John son of Edmund Everard and Alice his wife, querents, and 
Edmund, son of Edmund Everard, deforciant, of the manor of Brode- 
wyndesore. Plea of covenant was summoned. The querents acknow- 
ledged the manor to be the right of Edmund as by their gift. For this 

21 



3i8 Dorset Fines. 



he granted it to them and rendered it at the court. To have and to 
hold to John and Alice and the heirs of their bodies, of the King and 
his heirs by the services which belong to that manor, for ever ; with 
remainder, should John and Alice die without heir of their bodies, to the 
right heirs of John. To hold of the King and his heirs by the services 
which belong to the manor, for ever. This concord was made by pre- 
cept of the King. 

[Endorsed,] Thomas de Laune put in his claim. 

(206) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Ed- 
mund son of Edmund Everard, querent, and Richard de la Bere, 
deforciant, of the manor of Thornton, except 2 messuages, 2 virgates 
of land and 5 acres of meadow. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Richard acknowledged the manor as is abovesaid, to be the right of 
Edmund. For this, Edmund granted it to Richard, and rendered it 
at the court. To have and to hold to Richard for life, of the chief lords 
of that fee, with remainder after his death to his son Richard and the 
heirs of his body. To hold of the chief lords by the services which 
belong to the said manor, for ever ; with remainder, should Richard 
son of Richard die without heir of his body to John, brother of Richard 
son of Richard, and the heirs of his body. To hold of the chief lords, 
as aforesaid ; with remainder, should John die without heir of his body, 
to Edmund, brother of John, and the heirs of his body. To hold of the 
chief lords, as aforesaid ; with remainder, should Edmund die without 
heir of his body, to Thomas brother of Edmund, and the heirs of his 
body. To hold of the chief lords as aforesaid ; with remainder should 
Thomas die without heir of his body, to the right heirs of Richard 
de La Bere. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid. 

(207) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. John Baptist, 
between John de Monte Alto, querent, and Richard de Warmynton, 
clerk, and Hugh de Monte Alto, deforciants, of the manor of Magna 
Crauford, except 4 messuages, 52 ac. of land, i ac. of meadow. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. John acknowledged the manor, as is 
abovesaid, to be the right of Hugh, as that which he and Richard had 
by his gift. For this, they granted it to John, and rendered it at the 
court. To have and to hold to John for life, of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to the manor ; with remainder, after 
his death, to John Frelond and Agnes his wife and the heirs of their 
bodies. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid ; with remainder, 
should they die without heir of their bodies, to the right heirs of John 
de Monte Alto. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid. 

(208) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between John Le Grete and Alice his wife, querents, and Robert Douk' 
and William de Perret, deforciant, of land in Fordyngton. Plea of 



20 Edward II. (1326-27). 319 

covenant was summoned. John and Alice acknowledged the tenements 
to be the right of Robert and William as by their gift. For this, Robert 
and William granted the tenements to John and Alice and rendered the 
same at the court. To have and to hold to John and Alice and the 
heirs of Alice of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong 
to the tenements, for even 

(209) At Westminster, on the morrow of Souls, between Reginald 
de Haselden and Edith his wife, querents, by Simon de Wyly in Reg- 
inald's place, and by the said Simon, guardian of Edith, and John de 
Holte, deforciant, of the manor of Bradele and advowson of the chapel 
of the said manor. Plea of covenant was summoned. Thomas and 
John granted the manor and advowson to Reginald and Edith and 
rendered them at the court. To have and to hold to Reginald and 
Edith and the heirs of their bodies of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the manor and advowson for ever, with re- 
mainder after their deaths in default of such heir, to the right heirs of 
Reginald. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the manor and advowson for ever. 

[Endorsed,^ John son of Reginald de Haselden put in his claim. 

(210) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between 
Richard de la Bere and Clarice his wife, querents, by William de Perret 
in place of Clarice, and Edmund son of Edmund Everard, deforciant, of 
the manor of Parva Kyngton and 12 librates of rent in Magna Kyngton. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Richard acknowledged the manor 
and rent to be the right of Edmund, as by his gift. For this, Edmund 
granted the manor and rent to Richard and Clarice and rendered them 
at the court. To have and to hold to Richard and Clarice and the 
heirs of their bodies, of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
-which belong to that manor and rent, for ever ; with remainder after 
their deaths in default of such heir to the right heirs of Richard. To 
hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
said manor and rent for ever. 

(211) At Westminster, fifteen days after the day of St. Michael, 
between John de Hamme and Matilda his wife, querents, by William de 
Perret in Matilda's place, and Thomas de Pusele, deforciant, of i mes- 
suage, I carucate of land, 10 acres of meadow and 30s. of rent in Stur- 
munstre juxta Newton Castel. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
John acknowledged the tenements to be the "right of Thomas as by his 
gift. For this, Thomas granted them to John and Matilda and rendered 
them at the court. To have and to hold to John and Matilda and the 
heirs of their bodies, of Thomas and his heirs for ever, rendering 
therefor yearly one rose at the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist 
for all service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lord of that fee for 



320 Dorset Fines. 



Thomas and his heirs all other services which belong to those tene- 
ments, for ever. Should John and Matilda die without heir of their 
bodies^ then after their deaths the tenements shall wholly revert to 
Thomas and his heirs quit of the other heirs of John and Matilda. To 
hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those 
tenements for ever. 



DIVERS COUNTIES. 

3 Edward XL (1309-10). 

DORSET AND WILTS. 

(34) At Westminster, in the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, 
between William le Frenshe and Eustachia his wife, querents, by Henrj" 
son of Philip son of Elias in place of Eustachia, and Adam de Bagyn- 
dene, deforciant, of 3 messuages, 3 carucates of land and 60s. of rent in 
Upwymburne All Saints, Craneburne, Brokhamptone, Knoltone and 
Holtewell and the advowson of a moiety of the church of the vill of 
Upwymbourne All Saints in co. Dorset and lands in co. Wilts. Plea 
of covenant was summoned. William acknowledged the property to be 
the right of Adam as by his gift. For this Adam granted the same to 
William and Eustachia and rendered it in the court. To have and to 
hold to William and Eustachia and the heirs they beget, of the chief 
lords of that fee by the services which belong to the property. Should 
William die without heir begotten of Eustachia, then after the deaths 
of both William and Eustachia the property shall wholly remain to the 
right heirs of William. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to the property, for ever. 

5 Edward XL (1311-12). 

DORSET AND WILTS. 

(58) At Westminster, 15 days from the day of St. Martin, between 
Robert le Bor, querent, and Elias de Hulle, deforciant, of i messuage&gt; 
3 virgates of land, 16 acre's of meadow, 22s. of rent in Wybrigge and 
Kyngton in co. Dorset and land and rent in co. Wilts. Plea of cove- 
nant was summoned. Elias acknowledged the tenements to be the 
right of Robert and rendered them in the court. To have and to hold 
to Robert and his heirs of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to those tenements, for ever. Moreover he granted for 
himself and his heirs that they will warrant the property to Robert and 
his heirs against all men, for ever. For this, Robert gave to Elias. 
200. 



Divers Counties, Edward II. 321 

6 Edward 11. (1312-13). 

DORSET, WILTS AND GLOUCESTER. 

(72) At Westminster, in the morrow of St. John Baptist, between John 
Mautravers, junior, querent, and John Mautravers, senior, deforciant, 
of the manors of Wickhampton, Langeton and Wolecumbe in co. Dorset 
and manors in co. Wilts and co. Gloucester. Plea of covenant was 
summoned. John, senior, acknowledged the manors to be the right of 
John, junior, as by his gift. For this, John, junior, granted them to 
John, senior, and rendered them in the court. To have and to hold to 
John, senior, during his life, of John, junior, and his heirs, rendering 
therefor yearly one rose at the feast of the Nativity of St. John for all 
service &amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords of those fees for John, 
junior, and his heirs all other services belonging to the manors. After 
John senior's death the manors wholly shall revert to John, junior, and 
his heirs quit of the heirs of John Mautravers, senior. To hold of the 
chief lords of those fees by the services which belong to those manors, 
for ever. 

SOUTHAMPTON, DORSET AND SOMERSET. 

(75) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between John 
de Kyngesbury, querent, and Hugh de Bello Campo and Amidonia his 
wife, deforciants, of 2 messuages, 2 carucates of land, 16 acres of meadow, 
40 acres of wood, and 13s. of rent in Kentelesworth and Gatemarston in 
in CO. Dorset, land and rent in co. Southampton and land, rent and ad- 
vowsons in co. Somerset. Plea of covenant was summoned. Hugh 
and Amidonia acknowledged the property to be the right of John as by 
their gift. For this, John granted to Hugh and Amidonia the same 
property and rendered it in the court. To have and to hold to Hugh 
and Amidonia and the heirs they beget, of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to the property, for ever. Should Amidonia 
die without heir begotten by Hugh, he living, then after the deaths of 
both Hugh and Amidonia the property wholly will remain to the heirs 
begotten by Hugh. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the services 
which belong to the property, for ever, with remainder to the right 
heirs of Amidonia should Hugh die without heir of his body. To hold 
of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the property, 
for ever. 

DORSET AND DEVON. 

(79) At Westminster, fifteen days from the day of St. Martin, be- 
tween Peter de Blunt, querent, and Walter Folyot and Ada his wife, 
deforciants, of the manor of Melebury Saunford in co. Dorset and a 



32 2 Dorset Fines, 



manor in co. Devon. Plea of covenant was summoned. Walter and 
Ada acknowledged the manors to be the right of Peter as by their gift. 
For this, Peter granted them to Walter and Ada and rendered them in 
the court. To have and to hold to Walter and Ada for their lives, of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the manors, 
with remainder after their deaths to Nicholas de Percy and Joan his 
wife and the heirs they beget. To hold of the chief lords of that 
fee by the services which belong to those manors, for ever. With re- 
mainder, should Nicholas and Joan die without heir of their bodies, to 
the right heirs of Adam. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by the 
services which belong to those manors, for ever. 
\Endorsed?[ Henry de H addon puts in his claim. 

DORSET AND SUFFOLK. 

(82) At Westminster in the octaves of Holy Trinity, between Roger 
de Boxstede and Geoffrey Wenge, chaplain, querents, and Robert de 
Leyes and Amy his wife, deforciants, of a third part of the manor of 
Childokford in co. Dorset and land and rent in co. Suffolk. Plea of 
covenant was summoned. Robert acknowledged the teaements to be 
the right of Roger as those which he and Geoffrey had of his gift. For 
this, Roger and Geoffrey granted the tenements to Robert and Amy and 
rendered them in the court. To have and to hold to Robert and Amy 
and the heirs they beget of the King and his heirs by the services which 
belong to those tenements, for ever. With remainder should Robert 
and Amy die without heir of their bodies, to the right heirs of Robert. 
To hold of the King and his heirs by the services which belong to those 
tenements, for ever. This concord was made by precept of the King. 

7 Edward II. (1313-14). 

WILTS AND DORSET. 

(92) At Westminster, fifteen days from the day of Easter, between 
Henry Le Moigne and Joan his wife, querents, by John de Brideport 
in Joan's place, and Thomas de Osmynton, deforciant, of the manor 
of Oure Moigne and advowson of the church there, in co. Dorset and 
land and rents in co. Wilts. Plea of covenant was summoned. Henry 
acknowledged the tenements and advowson to be the right of Thomas, 
as by his gift. For this, Thomas granted them to Henry and Joan and 
rendered them in court. To have and to hold to Henry and Joan and 
the heirs of Henry of the King and his heirs by the services which 
belong to those tenements and advowson, for ever. This concord was 
made by precept of the King. 



Divers Counties, Edward II. 323 

DORSET AND BERKS. 

(94) At Westminster, three weeks from the day of Easter, be- 
tween John Mautravers, junior, and Milisent his wife, querents, by 
Richard de Salle in Milisent's place, and William Mautravers, de- 
forciant, of the manor of Lodres Byngham in co. Dorset and land and 
rent in co. Berks. Plea of covenant was summoned. John acknow- 
ledged the tenements to be the right of William as by his gift. For 
this, William granted the tenements to John and Milisent and rendered 
them in the court. To have and to hold to John and Milisent and the 
heirs of John of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to those tenements, for ever. 

9 Edward 11. (1315-16). 
SOMERSET, DORSET, BUCKS AND DEVON. 

(114) At Westminster, fifteen days from the day of St. Michael, 
between Hugh de Curtenay, querent, and Stephen de Haccumbe, de- 
forciant, of the manor of Iwerne Curtenay in co. Dorset, and manors in 
CO. Bucks and manors and advowsons in co. Devon, which Alianora 
who was the wife of Hugh de Curtenay holds in dower. Plea of cove- 
nant was summoned. Hugh acknowledged the property to be the 
right of Stephen. For this, Stephen granted that the said property 
which Alianora held in dower of the inheritance of Stephen on the day 
this concord was made and y^hich after her death ought to revert to 
Stephen and his heirs should then remain to Hugh for life. To hold 
of the King and his heirs by the services which belong to the property. 
With remainder, after Hugh's death, to Hugh son of Hugh de Curtenay 
and the heirs of his body. To hold of the King by the services which 
belong to the property. If Hugh son of Hugh should die without heir 
of his body, then the property wholly shall remain to Robert son of 
Hugh de Curtenay and the heirs of his body. To hold of the King, 
as aforesaid. If Robert should die without heir of his body then the 
property wholly shall remain to Thomas son of Hugh de Curtenay and 
the heirs of his body. To hold of the King as aforesaid, for ever. This 
concord was made in presence of Alianora who agreed thereto and did 
fealty in the court to Hugh de Curtenay. 

WILTS AND DORSET. 

(115) At Westminster, three weeks from the day of St. Michael, 
between Hildebrand de London and Margaret his wife, querents, by 
John de Creklade in Margaret's place, and Margaret de Morle, de- 
forciant, of I messuage and 2 carucates of land in Hoydone in co. 



324 Dorset Fines, 



Dorset, and a manor in co. Wilts. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Hildebrand acknowledged the tenements to be the right of Margaret de 
Morle as by his gift. For this, Margaret granted them to Hildebrand 
and Margaret and rendered them in court. To -have and to hold to 
Hildebrand and Margaret his wife during their lives, of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements. With re- 
mainder after their deaths to Robert son of Hildebrand and the heirs of 
his body. To hold of the chief lords of that fee, as aforesaid, for ever. 
With rehiainder, should Robert die without heir of his body to Richard 
his brother and the heirs of his body. To hold as aforesaid for ever. 
With remainder should Richard die without heir of his body, to Matilda 
sister of Richard and the heirs of her body. To hold as aforesaid, for 
ever. With remainder should Matilda die without heir of her body, to 
the right heirs of Hildebrand. To hold of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 

10 Edward IL (1316-17). 

DORSET, WILTS AND DEVON. 

(130J At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Michael, between Robert 
son of Pagan and Isabella who was the wife of Robert son of Pagan, 
querents, by John de Middelton in Isabella's place, and Ingelramus 
Berenger, deforciant, of the manor of Wrockeshale in co. Dorset, a manor 
in CO. Wilts and a manor in co. Devon. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Robert acknowledged the manors to be the right of Ingel- 
ramus as by his gift. For this, Ingelramus granted them to Isabella 
and rendered them in court. To have and to hold to Isabella during 
her life, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the 
manors, with remainder after her death to Robert. To hold during his 
life, of the chief lords of the fee as aforesaid. With remainder after 
Robert's death to Robert son of the said Robert, and Matilda his wife 
and the heirs of their bodies, To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, 
for ever. With remainder, should Robert and Matilda die without heir 
of their bodies to the right heirs of Robert son of Pagan. To hold of 
the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. 

SOMERSET, DORSET AND DEVON. 

(145) At Westminster, one month from the day of Easter, be- 
tween William Denebaud and Joan his wife, querents, by William de 
Peret in Joan's place, and Thomas de Stokelinch, vicar of the church of 
Sowy, deforciant, of i messuage, i carucate of land and 66s. 8d. rent 
in Wodiete and Pentrich in co. Dorset, a mesuage, mill, land and rent 



Divers Counties, Edward II. 325 

in CO. Somerset and messuages and land in co. Devon. Plea of cove- 
nant was summoned. William acknowledged the tenements to be the 
right of Thomas as by his gift. For this Thomas granted the tene- 
ments to William and Joan and rendered them in court. To have and 
to hold to William and Joan and the heirs they beget, of the chief lords 
of that fee by the services which belong to the tenements for ever. 
With remainder should William and Joan die without heir of their 
bodies, to the right heirs of William. To hold of the chief lords, as 
aforesaid, for ever. 

II Edward II. (1317-18). 

SOMERSET AND DORSET. 

(160) At Westminster, fifteen days from Easter day, between 
Thomas Daumarle and Cecilia his wife, querents, by Thomas de Cru- 
keme in Cecilia's place, and Nicholas Portebref, deforciant, of the manor 
of Milton juxta Gillyngham in co. Dorset and manors in co. Somerset. 
Plea of covenant was summoned. Thomas acknowledged the manors 
to be the right of Nicholas, as by his gift For this, Nicholas granted 
them to Thomas and Cecilia and rendered them in court. To have 
and to hold to Thomas and Cecilia and the heirs of their bodies, of the 
chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to those manors, for 
ever. With remainder, should Thomas and Cecilia die without heir of 
their bodies, to the right heirs of Thomas. To hold of the chief lords, 
as aforesaid, for ever. 

SOMERSET AND DORSET. 

(163) At Westminster, three weeks from the day of Easter, between 
Edward de Stradelyng and Elena his wife, querents, by William de 
Perret in Elenas's place, and Michael le Rous, deforciant, of i messuage, 
2 carucates of land, 25 acres of meadow, 15 acres of wood and io8s. 8^d. 
of rent in Cumpton Harveye and the advowson of the church, in co. 
Dorset, and messuages, mill, land and rent and advowson in co. Somer- 
set. Plea of covenant was summoned. Edward acknowledged the 
tenements and advowsons to be the right of Michael, as by his gift. 
For this, Michael granted them to Edward and Elena and rendered 
them in court. To have and to hold to Edward and Elena and the 
heirs of their bodies, of the chief lords of that fee by the services which 
belong to the tenements and advowsons, for ever. With remainder, 
should Edward and Elena die without heir of their bodies, to the right 
heirs of Edward. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. 



326 Dorset Fines. 



12 Edward II. (1318-19). 
DORSET AND SOMERSET. 

(177) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Hilary, between William 
de Reigny, querent, and John de Reigny and Mabilla his wife, defor- 
ciants, of 2 messuages, 60 acres of land, 2 acres of meadow and 40s. 
of rent in Brudeport, Bradepol and Mershwodeval in co. Dorset, and 
land and rent in co. Somerset. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
John and Mabilla acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
William, as by their gift. For this, William granted them to John and 
Mabilla and rendered them in court. To have and to hold to John and 
Mabilla and the heirs of their bodies, for ever, rendering therefor yearly 
one rose at feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist for all service, 
&amp;c., and doing therefor to the chief lords of that fee for William and his 
heirs all other services which belong to those tenements, for ever. 
With reversion, should John and Mabilla die without heir of their 
bodies, to William and his heirs, quit of the other heirs of John and 
Mabilla. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. 

16 Edward 11. (1322-23). 

SOMERSET, DORSET AND WILTS. 

(217) At York, in the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, between 
Robert fiz Payn and Ela his wife, querents, and Jordan de Byntre,. 
chaplain, deforciant, of the manors of Wrockeshale, Wodeton, Mersh- 
wode and the hundred of Whytechurch and advowsons of the churches 
of the aforesaid manors of Wrockeshale and Wodeton in co. Dorset^ 
and manors, hundred, and advowson in co. Somerset, and a manor 
and advowson in co. Wilts. Plea of covenant was summoned. 
Robert acknowledged the manors, hundreds and advowsons to be the 
right of Jordan as by his gift. For this, Jordan granted them to Robert 
and Ela and rendered them in court. To have and to hold the manors 
of Wodeton in co. Dorset and the manor iti co. Wilts and the advowsons 
of those churches of the chief lords of that fee, and the other manors, 
hundreds and advowsons of the King and his heirs, by the services 
which belong to those manors, hundreds and advowsons, for ever. 
This concord was made, in so much as relates to the property held 
of the King, by precept of the King. 

17 Edward II. (1323-24). 

DORSET AND WILTS. 

(219) At York, fifteen days from the day of St. Michael, between 
John de Lucy and Margaret his wife, querents, by John de Crikkelade in 



Divers Counties, Edward II. 327 

Margaret's place, and Richard de la More of Wambergh, deforciant, of 
a moiety of the manor of Kurthill, 7 librates and 10 solidates of rent in 
Fyrnham, Tarentestubhampton and Tarentegundevyll in co. Dorset, 
and a moiety of the manor of Tollard in co. Wilts. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. John acknowledged the tenements to be the right of 
Richard, as by his gift. For this, Richard granted them to John and 
Margaret and the heirs of their bodies. To have and to hold to John 
and Margaret and the heirs of their bodies, of the chief lords of that fee 
by the services which belong to the tenements, for ever. With re- 
mainder, should John and Margaret die without heir of their bodies, to 
the right heirs of John. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for 
ever. 

SOMERSET AND DORSET. 

(224) At Westminster, fifteen days from the day of Easter, be- 
tween Robert fiz Payn and Ela his wife, querents, and Jordan de 
Byntre, parson of the church of Wrockeshale and Geoffrey de Gode- 
maneston, parson of the church of Wodeton, deforciants, of the manor 
of Wrockeshale and advowson of the church in co. Dorset, and manors, 
hundred and advowson in co. Somerset. Plea of covenant was sum- 
moned. Robert and Ela acknowledged all the manors, hundred and 
advowsons to be the right of Jordan and Geoffrey as by their gift. For 
this, Jordan and Geoffrey granted them to Robert and Ela and rendered 
them in court. To have and to hold to Robert and Ela and the heirs 
male of their bodies, of the King by the services which belong to the 
property, for ever. With remainder, should Robert and Ela die without 
heir male of their bodies, to Robert son of Richard de Grey of Coden- 
oure and the heirs of his body. To hold of the King, as aforesaid, for 
ever. With remainder, should Robert son of Richard die without heir 
of his body, to Gilbert brother of Robert son of Richard and the heirs 
of his body. To hold of the King, as aforesaid, for ever. With re- 
mainder, should Gilbert die without heir of his body, to the right heirs 
of Robert fiz Payn. To hold of the King, as aforesaid, for ever. 
This concord was made by precept of the King. 

[Endorsed,'] Hugo de Knoville, Alice de Everingham, Thomas le 
Bret, Peter Helyon and Cecilia his wife and Thomas de Ivethorn and 
Sarra his wife put in their claims. 

SOMERSET AND DORSET. 

(225) At Westminster, fifteen days from the day of Easter, between 
Robert fiz Payn and Ela his wife, querents, and Jordan de Byntre 
parson of the church of Wrockeshale and Geoffrey de Godemaneston 



328 Dorset Fines, 



parson of the church of Wodeton, deforciants, of the manor of Akford 
and advowson of the church in co. Dorset and manor, tenements and 
advowson in co. Somerset. Plea of covenant was summoned. Robert 
and Ela acknowledged the property to be the right of Jordan, as that 
which he and Geoffrey had of their gift. For this, Jordan and Geoffrey 
granted it to Robert and Ela and rendered the same in court. To have 
and to hold to Robert and Ela and the heirs male of their bodies, of 
the chief lords of that fee by the services which belong to the manors 
tenements and advowsons for ever. With remainder should Robert 
and Ela die without heir male of their bodies, to Robert son of Richard 
de Grei of Codenoure and the heirs of his body. To hold of the chief 
lords, as aforesaid, for ever. With remainder, should Robert son of 
Richard die without heir of his body, to Gilbert brother of Robert son 
of Richard and the heirs of his body. To hold of the chief lords, as 
aforesaid, for ever. With remainder, should Gilbert die without heir of 
his body, to the right heirs of Robert fiz Payn. To hold of the chief 
lords, as aforesaid, for ever. 

[Endorsed,] Hugo de Knovill, Alicia de Everingham, Thomas le 
Bret and Peter Helyon and Cecilia his wife put in their claims. 

18 Edward II. (1324-25). 

DORSET AND SOMERSET. 

(241) At Westminster, in the octaves of St. Martin, between Roger 
Wodelok, querent, and Robert le Power of Wytham and Lucia his wife, 
deforciants, of a third part of the manor of Brumlegh in co. Dorset and 
a third part of the manor of Assh in co. Somerset. Plea of covenant 
was summoned. Robert and Lucia granted the third parts to Roger 
and rendered them in court, and remitted, to Roger and his heirs, what 
right they had in the said third parts in name of the dower of Lucia. 
For this, Roger gave to Robert and Lucia 10, 



WILTS, SOMERSET, DORSET, BERKS, GLOUCESTER, 
DEVON, SOUTHAMPTON AND OXFORD. 

(247) At Westminster, fifteen days from the day of Easter, between 
Hugh le Despenser, querent, and Ebulo Lestraunge and Alesia his wife, 
deforciants, of 11 knights' fees and a fourth part of a knight's fee in 
Coumbhaweye, Estdouelys, Westdouelys, Wynterbourn Houton, Wode- 
gate, Meleburn, Tollard, Blanford, Merton and Wakyngham in co. 
Dorset, and Knights' fees in the counties of Wilts, Somerset, Berks, 



Various Counties , Edward II. 329 

Gloucester, Devon, Southampton and Oxford. Plea of covenant was 
snmmoned. Ebulo and Alesia acknowledged the fees and fourth part 
to be the right of Hugh and remitted the same for themselves and the 
heirs of Alesia to Hugh and his heirs for ever. Moreover they granted 
that they would warrant the same to Hugh and his heirs against all 
men, for ever. For this Hugh gave to Ebulo and Alesia ;f 1000. 



VARIOUS COUNTIES. 

DORSET. 
II Edward II. (1317-18). 

(11) At Westminster in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John Jue (or Ive) and Idonia his wife, querents, and John Payn, defor- 
ciant, of I messuage, 4 carucates of land, loos. of rent in Hasilbere, 
Stocketurbervylle and Crockerestoke and the advowson of the church of 
Haselbere. Plea of covenant was summoned. John Jue (or Ive) ac- 
knowledged the tenements and advowson to be the right of John Payn 
as by his gift. For this John Payn granted them to John Jue (or Ive) 
and Idonia and rendered them in court. To have and to hold to John 
Jue (or Ive) and Idonia, during their lives, of the chief lords of that fee by 
the services which belong to the said tenements and advowson. With 
remainder after their deaths to Thomas son of the said John Jue (or Ive) 
and to Isabella daughter of Stephen de Abyngdon and the heirs of the 
bodies of the said Thomas and Isabella. To hold of the chief lords, as 
aforesaid, for ever. With remainder, should Thomas and Isabella die 
without heir of their bodies, to Matilda sister of Thomas and the heirs of 
her body. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. With re- 
mainder, should Matilda die without heir of her body, to Alice daughter 
of the said John Jue (or Ive) and the heirs of her body. To hold of the 
chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. With remainder, should Alice die 
without heir of her body, to Thomas, son of Walter Jue (or Ive) and 
the heirs of his body. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. 
With remainder, should Thomas son of Walter die without heir of his 
body, to John son of Ingelramus le Waleys and Joan his wife and the 
heirs of Joan. To hold of the chief lords, as aforesaid, for ever. 

Before the lord the King in his Chancery. 

(12) At Westminster in the octaves of St. John Baptist, between 
John Jue (or Ive) and Idonia his wife, querents, and John Payn, deforciant. 



^^o Dorset Fines. 



of I messuage, 4 carucates of land and lOos. of rent in Haselbere, ' 
Stocketurbervile and Crockerestoke and advowson of a moiety of the 
church of Haselbere. Plea of covenant was summoned, &amp;c. 

[The remaining portion of the last above written fine is exactly the 
same as the preceding. The first of the two deals with ** the advowson 
of the church," the second with the " advowson of a moiety of the 
church ". It may be that this second one was cancelled and the first 
dealing with "the advowson of the church," adopted. It is evident it 
came specially before the King from the unusual footnote ** Before the 
King in his Chancery ".] 
