STAVELEY.

1189–1200 Gilbert Fitz-Renfrid confirms to William Godmund the whole land of Staveley, which William de Lancastre and Helewise his wife gave to him and his heirs, with liberty to make improvements between the highway and Kent to the bounds of Bolteston and common of pasture with the grantor's men who dwell around, and that he, his heirs and their men shall be quit of pannage, saving the grantor's full multure and hunting; to hold by rendering yearly 3s. of farm and 16d. of cornage, half at Easter and half at Michaelmas, for all service except foreign service. Witnesses: Gilbert de Lancastre, Lambert de Bussei, Gilbert de Lancastre, younger, Adam Gernet, William de Windesore, Gamel the forester, William son of Geoffrey, Walter . . . ., William son of Ketel; Reg. of Deeds at Levens, f. 192.

1256 Perambulation of the boundary between the land of Peter de Brus in Hogayl, Foulbarg and Fayrhayt (Fairbank in the vill of Stirkeland Ketel) and the land of Walter de Lyndesey in Applethwayt and Micheleselet (now Misslett). The bounds commenced at Bredestrete as far as the burial place for dead men, and from that burial place as far as Whystoner next Wodewardehowe. And from thence as far as to Banerhowe in Thwaytlenkyld, and from thence as far as the south door of the barn of Adam de Porta. And from thence in a straight line to Hoggehalebek. And from thence in a straight line between Hethementer and the house of William de Porta, and so as far as the fountain of Gilbert de Lancaster, and so next the fountain which is called Fokebrig' by the breadth of two perches towards the south, and so as far as the houses built upon the arable land formerly belonging to Adam de Hothwayt. And from these boundaries as far as the land of Thomas de Howes which William Belle holds beyond the hedges of the aforesaid land towards Wynander mere, and so between a certain rock and le hakdale, and thus in a straight line as far as the middle of le Thursmyre; Trans. C. & W. A. & A. Soc., N.S. xiii, 69.

a 1272 Peter de Brus III granted to Richard de Gilpin his manor and demesne of Ulventhwait and land on each side of the water of Kent within the demesnes of Hugill, Staveley and Over Staveley, and the vivary or water of Kent flowing in Ulventhwait with liberty to erect a mill, with acquitance of puture, of 'witness man' and suit of court, rendering 12 barbed arrows and 2s. 6d.; Reg. of D. at Levens. See Appendix xxvi.

1274 Robert de Ros of Werk held at his death inter alia a moiety of the mill of Rispeton, the farms of Grenering and Hugayl, a meadow called Rispetunhenge, the farms of Beauconquayte, Staveleye, etc.; Cal. Inq., ii, 49. See Helsington, p. 133.

1280 Joan daughter of Gilbert de Hauteclo arraigned assizes against Thomas Collan (a) touching a way stopped in Staveley Godemund, and (b) touching common of pasture in Stavellay Godemund; Dep. Keeper's Rep. 49, app. 163.

1281 Grant to William de Twenge of a market on Fridays at his manor of Staveley in Kendale and a 3 days' fair on the eve, day and morrow of St. Luke the Evangelist; Reg. of D. at Levens.

1282 Nicholas son of John de Leyburn demands against Margaret late the wife of Robert de Ros of Werk 600 a. pasture in Sadegill and Stirkeland Ketel. Margaret says that she holds the said tenement with Walter son of Walter de Faucumbergh, Lucy wife of Marmaduke de Tweyng, Sibyl and Joan, daughters of Laderena late the wife of John de Bellewe, of the inheritance of one Peter de Brwys, their ancestor; Joan and Sibyl are under age; De Banco R. Easter, 45, m. 60d.; 47, m. 25d.

1295 William de Kendale impleaded Richard de Derleye and John his brother for taking him at Hogayl and imprisoning him; De Banco R., Trin., 109, m. 22.

1297 Confirmation of a charter of Margaret de Ros granting in fee simple to Marmaduke de Twenge her nephew, the manor of Helsington with inter alia the hamlet of Staveley. See Helsington, p. 137.

1301 Fine levied in accordance with the charter of Margaret de Ros to Marmaduke de Twenge respecting 39 carucates, the moiety of 5 mills in Crosthwaite, Le Lythe, Staveley Gamel, Hugill etc., etc. See Helsington, p. 138.

1307 Long before her death Margaret de Ros gave to her son William de Ros inter alia, the tenures of William son of Adam and Henry de Wytfalheved in Hogayl with the moiety of the mill of Respton; to Marmaduke de Thweng, she gave inter alia the hamlets of Hogayl and Staveley, except the 2 tenures named above, and a moiety of the mill of Respeton; Cal. Inq. IV, 285.

1310 William de Ros held at his death 2 tenements in the hamlet of Hogayl held by 2 tenants at will, each with a messuage worth 8d. and between them 48 a. land, worth 20s.; the herbage of a close there worth 7s.; the moiety of the mill of Respeton, worth 20s.; William de Gylpine held of the said William a messuage and one carucate in Ulvethayth for 2s. 7d. cornage and 12 arrows and 11b. of cummin; Cal. Inq. V, 119.

1323 Marmaduke de Thweng held at his death in the hamlet of Staveley 8 tenants at will, who render 33s. yearly; a park, the herbage of which yields 10s. yearly; a fulling-mill which renders 6s. 8d. yearly; in the hamlet of Hogayl 5 a. meadow in demesne, worth 12d. the acre; 6 (?) tenants at will who render 52s. yearly; the moiety of a water-cornmill which renders 20s. yearly; at Sategille the herbage is worth 3s. 4d. yearly; Lancs. Inq., pt. ii, 148.

1330 Gilbert de Lancastre grants to his son, Christopher, inter alia, his lands and tenements in Fatherbank, Staveley. See Skelsmergh, p. 252.

1332 Staveley Godemund. Subsidy of a fifteenth.
