Leicester prepares for Richard III reburial

Dadlington usually divides its sympathies between the two sides, but for this they are coming out in favour of the deposed king in the Battle of Bosworth Field

Leicester is filling up with yellow road signs, warning of the return of the once and future king: "King Richard III Route Sunday 22 – expect delays".

Many have been wondering how to get hold of them to keep as
souvenirs of an extraordinary episode in the history of the city and county, as the final preparations get underway for the 21st century reburial of a medieval king.

It is more than two years since the bones rediscovered by archaeologists under a council car park in the heart of Leicester, were formally identified as those of the last Plantagenet king.

In 1485 the burial by Franciscan friars was unceremonious. In the heat of August, several days after his death at Bosworth, he was buried hastily in a roughly-dug grave slightly too small for his naked body. This time a week of events will surround the reinterment on Thursday 26 in the cathedral – delayed for a year by a legal challenge claiming that he should have been buried in York – including a procession on Sunday through the countryside associated with the last days of the last Plantagenet, led by two knights in armour on horseback.

There will be prayers in the cathedral from two archbishops, Justin Welby and Vincent Nichols; open-air religious services; live television broadcasts to an audience of millions; lectures, art exhibitions and book launches; flower festivals; concerts of medieval music; fireworks and the first ringing of a new peal of bells composed for Richard.

In the cathedral the £2.5m remodelling outside and in is almost complete. Beautiful red sandstone slabs, inset with four small white stone roses, have been laid in the new space created behind the altar, where purple drapes now cover a brick-lined pit ready to receive the coffin. The work disturbed seven previously unrecorded burial vaults, and their dozens of occupants have been reverently gathered up and reburied. The tomb of the Vaughns, a 19th-century vicar and his family, which began to peel off the wall from the vibrations from the work, has been boxed in for safety and will be restored later.

"We're almost there," the Rev Pete Hobson said. "The new altar is due to arrive with just two or three days to spare – when it comes I'll breath more easily."

People are coming from all over the world not just for the cathedral, where every seat could have been filled a hundred times, but to myriad events in the small villages and towns usually bypassed by tourists: they include a Last Plantagenet Dinner at the Red Lion in Market Bosworth, where school children have made half a mile of bunting and the medieval costumes have arrived for all the staff of Chocol8s sweet shop selling shields ornamented with white chocolate roses.

In the village of Sutton Cheney representatives of the local council, the highways authority, the cathedral, villagers, the vicar and churchwardens, gathered to measure with a stop watch every second of the ten minutes the cortege will stop on Sunday afternoon on its slow way to the cathedral. It won't allow enough time to come into the church of St James the Greater, where Richard is believed to have taken his last communion before the battle, so Julia Hargreaves will hold a prayer service at the gate. Clerk Shelley Howard arrived a little late, having taken a phone call from somebody in Ohio asking if they could come to the previous night's candlelit service. "They wanted to know how much the tickets were," she said, shaking her head in amazement.

A country lane leads from the village street to Ambion Hill, where Richard's troops are believed to have camped on the eve of battle, now the site of the Bosworth Battlefield Heritage Centre where a major open air ceremony will be led by the Tim Stevens, the bishop of Leicester. When tickets went online 10 days ago, the website crashed within minutes: every member of staff came in to deal by phone with thousands of enquiries.

Richard Mackinder, operations manager at the centre, is slightly worried about the impact of the event on passionate Ricardians: "When the dead body of a medieval king – the real remains of a man some of these people have idolised for much of their lives – passes within a few yards, I think it's going to be an unimaginable experience. We have to prepare for every eventuality."

The churchyard at Dadlington gives a panoramic view of the entire battle landscape, from Ambion Hill to the marshy corner of a field at Fen Lane, several miles away, where Richard lost his horse in a last desperate charging attempt to kill the future Henry VII, lost his crown and his helmet, and then lost his life to two savage blows to the base of his skull.

The village was so close to the fighting that some accounts called it the battle of Dadlington, and a small blue sign in the graveyard records that the bodies of hundreds who fell on both sides were buried there. On at least three occasions in the last two centuries, most recently in the 1950s, pits of bones were found as graves were being dug for village funerals.

After the cortege passes through, the tiny village has organised an entire day of events, centred on the village green and hall – which they decided last month was looking unacceptably shabby and within a fortnight, using local volunteers and donated materials, completely redecorated inside and out.

Dadlington usually divides its sympathies between the two sides, but the villagers have already packed the church on a Saturday night, put Richard on trial for the murder of his nephews, the Little Princes in the Tower, and found him not guilty: "you may leave without a stain on your character," Jacqui Morton, a former banker acting as judge for the night, assured him.

The battlefield centre usually flies the standards of both Richard and Henry Tudor – "without wanting to appear like the Stanleys", Mackinder said, of Richard's former ally who lurked on the fringes of the battle until he saw which way the wind was blowing and then threw in his forces with the Tudors, "we usually have to sit on the fence a bit" – but on Sunday will only fly Richard's.

At Sutton Cheney, on the anniversary of the battle every August, churchwarden Mary Burgess includes a little red posy with the white flowers she lays for Richard, to remember the dead of both sides. "But on Sunday we'll have white flowers only," she said. "This is the day for Richard."
